## 131 RR How to Learn

#### Picks
- Mastery by Robert Greene
- 5 Elements of Effective Thinking
- Cal Newport: So Good They Can't Ignore You.
- Josh Kaufman: The First 20 Hours Ted Talk
- PhotoReading Personal Learning Course
- ‘The Making of an Expert’ and it’s by Ericsson and his colleagues, the people who were the originators of the 10,000 hours idea.
- Joe Kutner about The Healthy Programmer on The Freelancers’ Show
- Vegas Pro plugin Vegasaur
- LastPass
- HelloSign

So one of the things I find really interesting about this idea of effort is that the place where you learn is the place where you’re reaching, you’re stretching. And if you stay in your comfort zone, you don’t learn because you’re not stretching. So there’s this idea of a sweet spot or a discomfort zone that’s just beyond the reach of what you know, what you are capable of right now. And it’s not too far out of your zone. It’s not in your panic zone. Because in your panic zone, you just shut down and you don’t learn anything because you’re panicked. And there’s a lot research about the physiology of panic and how that gets in the way of learning. But learning to identify the sweet spot, or this discomfort zone, is really interesting because it’s really hard. It takes a lot of effort to stay there. And it’s exhausting. And it’s also worth it.

And basically, anytime you’re stuck or you’re flailing or you’re aware of discomfort while you’re practicing or while you’re trying to get better at something, while you’re trying to learn something, NOPS is the acronym. And it stands for Notice it, so just be aware that it’s happening. Own it and basically say, “Okay, yes. This is happening to me. I’m not going to deny that I’m uncomfortable. I’m not going to deny that I’m out of my comfort zone. I’m just going to own the fact that yup, I’m out of my comfort zone,” which goes a long way towards alleviating anxiety which you need to get unstuck in this place.

The P in NOPS is really interesting. Push into it. And so what this actually means is yeah, if you can’t wrap your head around recursion, sit down and just write the stupid, simplest recursion program and write it over and over and over. Actually, the Push into it is actually push into the specific discomfort so if there’s something about it that you can identify that makes you uncomfortable, go there. Try to make yourself more uncomfortable is basically what push into it does. So if you’re in a social situation and you’re doing anxiety about talking to people, Notice it, Own it, Push into it means walk up to someone and start talking to them just to see how it makes you feel.

The value that I assign to this natural aptitude is more or less along the lines of we like to do things that we’re good at and we also get recognition for being good at things. And so whether we practice it because we want to be good at it and become good at it and get recognition or whether we have some kind of natural aptitude and we get recognized for doing something unexpected with it given our level or experience, I think that’s really all that it gets us. And the rest of it is effort. The rest of it is the time that we put in learning how to do it. And I think, as I said before, I think that can really trump the natural aptitude for some of these things.

So the 10,000 hours is not 10,000 hours of doing something. It’s 10,000 hours of a very deliberate type of effort to take you to a level, a degree of proficiency that is very, very rare. The 10,000 hours rules is about people who are at the very top of their field, the very, very edge of what is currently possible in a field.

KATRINA:  I read a lot about practice in my quest to become better at things like physics and math and later programming. My reading of this is a couple of things. People say that practice makes perfect. This apparently is wrong. Practice makes permanent. So practicing something will make it, it will optimize the neural pathways that you use to do that thing. So if you’re practicing something wrong, you will end up being permanently wrong. So that’s one important part of practice.

Another thing that I’ve found about practice, or read about practice, is that there are very many different types of practice. And you do them for different purposes. So the basic five types of practice that I’ve come across and thought a lot about are drills, where you focus on a specific skill, a very, very narrow skill. And you have a lot of repetition and a really, really close, tight feedback loop. And you do it over and over to embed something more deeply neurologically.

Then you have simulations where it’s like a safe environment to do something that is real-ish. So in sports, that’s where you have these games that are not official games. You just play against your teammates in pretend situations. And these often optimize for adding the types of things that you might hit three times in a season. But you’re optimizing the simulation so that you get it over and over and over again so that you can become better at being more flexible in those types of situations.

And then there is case studies where you observe and reflect and think deeply and analyze. I usually hear about case studies in people doing MBAs and that sort of thing. But it’s also very typical in a lot of different fields, for example in chess, where people will study a particular board or a particular game and try to imagine or determine what the next move is going to be.

JAMES:  Very good [inaudible]

KATRINA:  Yeah, and then they go check that against what the actual grandmaster did in that game next. And then when they discovered that they don’t have the same idea as the grandmaster, they try to figure out, “Okay, why is the choice that the grandmaster made probably a better choice?” And then you have what musicians and dancers and circus acrobats do, which is direct practice where you have a particular piece that’s a performance piece and you practice it until you know it so by heart that you can focus on the higher-level details of nuance and all that.

And then you have imitation, which is a really interesting one, which I think probably is one of the oldest ways of learning that you have with old apprenticeships from the middle ages. And doing exactly what a master does without any judgment about why you’re doing it or what you’re going to learn from it. And then in retrospect, discovering what you’ve learned from it.

And I think Kathy Sierra’s been talking about this quite a bit lately, that in the beginning it’s way better to expose you to good stuff than bad stuff. We have this idea that you should see lots of different things and that you can’t really know what good stuff is until you’ve seen the bad stuff. And that may be accurate at higher scope levels and stuff. But at the lower scope levels, being exposed to good techniques and stuff is super, super valuable. And if you’re practicing that from day one, think about it this way. when you’re learning to program, if one of the first things you learn is write small methods, how far will that get you? Pretty far, right?

And I think one of the really good things about what Kathy Sierra, or one of the interesting things about what Kathy Sierra has been talking about is exposing beginners to lots and lots and lots of good code is they won’t necessarily know why it’s good but they’ll have developed some sort of instinct and that they will start recognizing things that maybe later, maybe months later, they’ll be able to articulate why this is a good thing, particularly in comparison with some of the newer things that they’re seeing that are bad.

KATRINA:  Well there’s something really satisfying about being able to get something done. So that if you’re writing a 100-line method, you’re totally getting it done. It’s working. You’re delivering value. And now if you’re going to have to go learn how to do something that you don’t know how to do, it’s uncomfortable because you’re going to suck at it. And it’s really hard to suck at things. For me. Other people are probably better at it. But I hate sucking at stuff.

 There’s a meme going around the internet right now that just says, “Remember, sucking at something is the first step to becoming sort of good at something.”

In programming we have a similar thing. We have code smells, which is how we learn to recognize that code is sick, so to speak. And we know these things we’re supposed to avoid. It’s come to my attention recently that one of the largest differences, I believe, between a programming novice and a programming expert is that we can filter these criteria. I’ll tell you what I mean by that.

I got one a while back about somebody who’d been listening to our show and they read Sandi Metz’s Cdr and several other things. They’ve basically gotten themselves to the point where they were getting a solid understanding of all of the things that are at play when we write software. So I need small methods and I need to do this and I need to do that. The problem was they were taking all of those things and trying to apply them all at once. And when you do that, you’re basically penalized.

And somehow, experienced programmers seem to develop this intuition of which criteria applies right now. Oh yeah, I know we’re usually supposed to do this, but in this case that’s not the most important thing. In this case, the most important thing is that I follow this other rule and that’s going to make up for the fact that I’m [slagging] this one. And there may be situations where you can follow all the rules or maybe most of the rules. But there are definitely cases where you have to make tradeoffs like that. And I want to know how is it that we develop that? What is it that pushes us over that line, being able to filter that?

I have a hypothesis about this. I think that it has to do with choosing to follow only one rule to an extreme in a bunch of different situations and seeing where that plays well to you and where it really screws you up. What are the pain points? What are the tradeoffs that you are making by following this rule? And I think that that experience and that pain and those wins are the thing that let you recognize that this situation here is a lot like this other situation where following that rule was not the most important thing.

You notice a good technique and you decide to own it and then you push into it and stay with it and dial it up to eleven. And then you own it at that point. And then you can step back.

#### Tips on starting learning something.

KATRINA: The first thing is that it’s going to be painful. You’re going to suck and that has to be okay for at least 20 hours. And I think it’s very helpful when starting out to have a very small, very specific goal. Like I want to learn about Cassandra and so I will figure out how to take my log files and write it into something and then get out a time series. Or I want to have something that is very doable and very specific. I’m not going to read all the books about it. I want to be able to actually achieve some specific thing. And to me, starting to learn something new really has to involve doing something and not just thinking about something. Otherwise, I never get better at it.

JAMES: So it’s good if you have these little successes along the way, because you’re like, “Oh, I can do this. I’m getting this.” Whereas if you lay that whole mountain in front of you and start climbing, that’s a long way up.

AVDI:  I want to expand on that a little bit, just the idea of having a goal in mind. I think it’s incredibly important, particularly with tech learning. I’m not sure how much this applies to other areas. But with tech, tech learning I’ve found that I absolutely have to have an excuse to learn something. I’ve tried over and over again to learn things just for the sake of learning them. And I do. I still do it from time to time.

But when it comes to programming languages or new database technologies or whatever, if I don’t actually have an application for it, it’s not going to happen. I’ll pick up a few things about it, but the actual learning is not going to happen. You have to have an excuse. And the excuse can be, and often is, an actual need in an application that you’re developing, in which case it should be not an application that you’re developing because you wanted to have that excuse but actually an application that you really want to have. Because you need that impetus.

AVDI:  That’s a great question. When they were first coming out, I think I feel this and I suspect that we all feel this at times, is that when there’s a new technology or a bunch of new related technologies coming down the pipe, we feel compelled to get on top of it and know all about it. Because we’re geeks and we’re developers and we need to be on top of this stuff. And I think that’s true up to the point of you need to be aware of what these things do. you need to be aware of what the point of these things are, which might mean hunting down somebody who’s using them in production and saying, “Okay, what the heck is the point of using Mongo? Why are you doing it?” But that’s the end of it until you actually run into a problem where you really, really do need it.

As far as I can tell, if I’ve done some inquiring around things like MongoDB and some of the other NoSQL stuff, as far as I can tell the only time you actually really need it is in applications where you’re doing tons and tons of writes. You’re just consuming enormous amounts of information from everywhere and lots and lots of clients are writing to you and you don’t have time. You don’t need the ACID compliance of a full relational database. And you don’t have time for the ACID compliance of a full relational database. You just have this massive scale of tons of writes.

And there are a few other use cases for the Mongo case, like there are certain very specific types of documents where that makes sense to store in a DB like that. So that’s how much I know at this point. I’ve done a little asking around and I understand maybe three triggers which would make me, in an application, which would make me say, “Okay, I think this actually calls for Mongo.” And at that point, I will have a great excuse to learn MongoDB inside and out. But until that point, I’ve given myself license to not care.

AVDI:  I think there are a lot of moving parts in what we do. And I do think there is a fundamental difference between programming and, say competitive swimming just in that there are performances, there’s performance and then there’s creation. And it’s hard to even draw parallels between getting better at a performance, whether it’s a performance of a physical feat or a musical passage, versus getting better at creating things. I don’t know. It seems like we don’t have metrics. But what you can do is you can observe yourself traveling from the point of inspiration to the point of delivery. And you can make notes along the way, say about what are the things that slowed me down. And you can make sure that the things that slow you down next time are not the same things that slowed you down the last time.

KATRINA:  I think mistakes are really interesting. I think that they’re a way that, it’s a thing that you can use very deliberately and say, “Okay, I’m going to do this thing,” and then I’m going to step back and say, “What do I not like about what I just did?” And even just considering that can give you ideas for maybe how you can do it differently next time. And then you change it a little bit and you step back again and ask, “What do I not like about this little thing that I did now?” And this can give you something to focus on. And I think it goes back to even though we don’t have metrics, we can set goals. We can be very specific about the thing that we want to try to improve.

JAMES:  So in the thread on Parley, one of the big topics, actually what started the thread, was how to read programming books, manuals, things like that. And there were a lot of good techniques given in the thread. And I think it might be worth it for us to just hit on some of those. I’ve been doing this a lot recently. Finally sat down and decided to learn JavaScript from the ground up and figure out all these things I didn’t know about it. So JavaScript, Jasmine, CoffeeScript, Backbone, et cetera. I’ve been spending a lot of time on that. I used these techniques I have for how to read books. And so I go about it.

DAVID:  You hit on an interesting point, that there are actually two or three different modes in which we can read. And I love the second one that you described there where you get away from the computer and just sit down. There are lots of techniques for reading for information and studying from books and trying to aggressively power your way through a tome of information. But we forget that there’s another way of reading, which is like sitting down with an old friend and, or with a new friend rather, and just chatting and just exchanging ideas. And it’s the sitting down by the fire with a good book, that kind of thing, is if the book is well-written, you can do that with a book. And yeah, you start at the beginning and you read to the end.

And so I talked in the pre-call about reading a book at about 80,000 words per minute. The reality was is I was familiar with all of the ideas already. I just needed them organized. And the book that I was reading organized those ideas for me. And so I was able to power through it very, very quickly. ‘Understanding Computation’ was a book that was full of new ideas for me, almost on every page. And it’s like hitting a speed bump every time. You turn the page and you go, “Ooh, new idea,” and I’ve got to sit with that and absorb it. And for those kinds of books, you can take your pick of whether you want to power through it or dive into it or whether you want to just sit and read it from one end to the other. Either way can be overwhelming, if you let it, which can be fun.

But yeah, the only thing I would add to what you said, James, about the first way of reading is that if you really want to aggressively attack a book and just shove it into your brain, is do those steps where you start at a high-level scope and work lower and lower and lower. Do those explicitly and actually in writing. So sit down and say, “I’m going to spend 60 seconds deciding if I want to read this book or not.” And that is your purpose for the next 60 seconds. So you read the dust jacket and the front and the back and skim the table of contents and that sort of thing. And then at the end you write down, do I still want to read this book? Yes or no. You write, yes I do. Okay, now I’m going to take two minutes and I’m going to get the lay of the book. I’m going to get the layout.

There’s a thing called information retrieval bias and what it means is that we tend to value information more if we had to go get it ourselves. So if you’re just reading casually and you stumble across something on the page, that can be fun and it can be a good lesson, but you emotionally you will value that less than if you already were looking for that answer and you had already formulated that question. And that’s what, when I power through a book at the high-levels, I will write out what I want at each level of abstraction, finer and finer detail, to the point where I’ll write out, “This chapter I want this information. Can Ruby do threading and how?” and that sort of thing. And then when I hit the answer, I’m like, “Aha! I have it.” And information retrieval bias causes me to value that information more and I will lock it into my memory faster and more deeply.

KATRINA:  So there’s this distinction that you’re making between gaining information, like getting facts, and retrieving facts and understanding. Understanding is different from information. And understanding something deeply is completely different from recall. And I think that how you read a book is going to depend on what you need to get out of that. If it is a deep understanding, you’re going to read it in a very different way than if all you really want to know is comparing different NoSQL databases or non-relational databases with each other.

DAVID:  Absolutely. So there’s a trick for that. I guess I’ll throw this in. this is one of my picks. But a lot of my learning brain hacks center around shotgunning information into my brain. I do this silly party trick where I can go to the whiteboard and I can have the crowd shout out a list of 20 things that they want me to go to the store and buy. And I will write them on the whiteboard as fast as they shout them out. Well, as fast as I can write. And by the time I get to number 20, I can put the marker down, I could turn around and face the audience and I can then recall the entire list. And if you give me an item, I can tell you what number it was. And if you give me a number, I could tell you what the item is. They’re completely locked. I can access it like an array by index. And it’s a party trick. It’s a brain trick.

But it’s immensely powerful for learning and understanding because you can’t learn a book by osmosis. You can’t put your textbook under a pillow and sleep on it and wake up knowing calculus. But if you can load all of the facts, way more facts. A human can repeat five to seven things in short term memory. What if you could keep a hundred things in your short term memory and churn them over all at the same time? And the answer to that what if is you very quickly start seeing patterns, because you’ve got a larger dataset in your working memory. And you start making connections between things. And so it really drives home the interrelationship between the data.

AVDI:  If I read a tech book at all, unless it’s just a reference, and even when it’s a reference, I read books straight through. I don’t always make myself spend lots of time on each page. Sometimes it might be close to skimming. But for me, it’s all about making myself aware of where to find the information that I need when I need it. Sometimes, I read patterns books all the way through. And I don’t spend a lot of time on each pattern. But I make sure that I’m just aware of what it is and what it’s there for. And that means that someday, I’m going to be working on a problem and it’ll pop into my head. Oh yeah, this triggers a memory, and I’ll go back and I’ll look it up in detail. But I tend to use that for a lot of tech books. I just read it all the way through, but I make sure I’m just filing away where to find stuff.

AVDI:  Yeah. I do like to read a whole book. Before I tackle a programming language, I’ve always liked to read an entire book first, and maybe do a few, a little bit of practice while I’m reading it. But I like to go from beginning to end. Because what I really hate is just not knowing whole areas or now being aware of whole areas as I’m working with a new technology or a new programming language. Because I find that I can waste a lot of time if I’m using a programming language where a lot of its power lies, let’s say in macros, but I’m not actually using macros yet because I never learned about them. I feel like that can waste a lot of time.

So I want to be aware of the landscape and so I’ll read from beginning to end and something. And then I’ll reference back as I actually hit stuff that I’m practically doing. I’m also pretty free with the highlighter as I go through a book. Whether it’s an eBook, e-Readers mostly allow highlighting these days, or a physical book, I tend to mark things up a lot. I’ll mark up a sentence that either caught my attention or that seems like it sums up the point of a series of paragraphs. And then as I’m flipping back through it in the future when I’m trying to find that one thing that I remember, usually that one thing that I’ll remember will be something that I highlighted. And it’ll be easy to find.

JAMES:  All the different exceptions and how they inherit from each other. And I would always go to that page. Which one do I want to throw here?

DAVID:  Yeah. I went through the Pickaxe reference with little Post-it tape flags. And I just flagged everything. I should back up a little bit. I am different from you Avdi in that I am very comfortable with having blind spots. And so I actually wrote a blog post about this a few months ago called ‘Teach yourself a new programming language in 21 minutes. Or two to three years, it depends.’ And basically, it’s still this top-down approach. You take five minutes and ask yourself do I really need to learn this programming language?

And I’ve never needed to learn makefiles. I’ve needed to manipulate them several times over my career, but it’s never been worth learning how to write a makefile. So I always have to go look it up every single time. And I’m okay with that. And I’ve just made that decision. But at the end of the process of going top-down, I do end up at the same place you are, which is where I know where everything is in the book. I might not have read all of the sections because I may have gotten down to a very low level and at the level above I decided, oh this is the exceptions or the macros chapter and I don’t need to know that right now. I know where it is but I’m not going to try and read it right now.

AVDI:  Yeah, and I apply that even to stuff that I use every day. That’s not just for something that I use occasionally. I don’t feel any compulsion whatsoever to memorize things. I was looking at some of those techniques for reading in the thread on Parley and there was this whole endless blog post about this elaborate system that somebody uses involving space repetition and building up sets of flash cards. And I was just staring at this in incredulity because I don’t understand why. I have so many pieces of technology for looking up information. I don’t understand why I would spend any time trying to commit things to my memory. Some things I use so often that they commit themselves to memory. It’s like a well-optimized cache on a CPU.

Sometimes I use a piece of Ruby so often that it commits itself to my memory. And that’s fine. Okay, I don’t need to look that up anymore. But I’m never going to be like, “Oh, I feel bad for looking up a particular Rails method or something like that. I should really memorize that.” If I haven’t used it enough times to automatically memorize it, to just have my brain cache that automatically, then I don’t feel any compulsion to force myself to do it. I think that’s just wasting brain space. I’m used to looking things up every few minutes as I code. And I think that’s normal.

I always remember, for me I realize that Arthur Conan Doyle is not a reputable source of neurological information. It always reminds me of Sherlock Holmes’ statement when he was confronted with Watson’s amazement that he didn’t know whether the earth revolved around the sun or the sun revolved around the earth. He was like, “That’s not relevant to my crime-solving and it would take up limited space in my limited-spaced brain. So I toss that out so that I have more room for other knowledge.”

AVDI:  See, I’m comfortable with the sense that I have, when I confront something like that, “Wait a minute,” my spider sense is tingling that there is a way to do this with core methods. And then I go look in the appropriate documentation and I found out that way. But I’m content with that spider sense that says there is something here that I don’t know but I know it exists. I don’t feel the need to actually commit all that stuff to memory as opposed to just knowing it exists.

DAVID:  So an interesting thing that I’ve observed is that not memorizing large banks of stuff is common among people who are high up on the Dreyfus scale. Einstein was famous for not knowing his own phone number. And when pressed on the subject, he’s like, “Why would I waste brain cells committing to memory something I can easily look up in a book?” It’s even an alphabetically organized book. But on the other hand, Katrina mentioned as well, needing to memorize is common among people that are at level one or two on the scale who want to get up into the middle of the scale. I’m in your camp now where I very rarely will aggressively memorize things.

JAMES:  I think it’s obviously clear from this conversation that we have different systems and different things work for different people. I would argue Avdi that even your system is pretty deliberate, that you’re purposefully laying out this map in your mind so that when you find yourself wandering in the woods, you at least know where to look. And that alone is a massive preparatory step, in my opinion.

DAVID:  I’ve never cared enough to ask, honestly. I’m kind of a sociopath. But yeah, we’ve all talked, right? We’ve all spoken at conferences. And like Avdi said, if you want to learn something, give a talk on it. And it’s not just because it will force you to learn the basics of it, but because it will force you to learn some of the edge cases and the intricacies of it and the reasons behind it and the pain points and how to compensate for them.