## 131 RR How to Learn

So one of the things I find really interesting about this idea of effort is that the place where you learn is the place where you’re reaching, you’re stretching. And if you stay in your comfort zone, you don’t learn because you’re not stretching. So there’s this idea of a sweet spot or a discomfort zone that’s just beyond the reach of what you know, what you are capable of right now. And it’s not too far out of your zone. It’s not in your panic zone. Because in your panic zone, you just shut down and you don’t learn anything because you’re panicked. And there’s a lot research about the physiology of panic and how that gets in the way of learning. But learning to identify the sweet spot, or this discomfort zone, is really interesting because it’s really hard. It takes a lot of effort to stay there. And it’s exhausting. And it’s also worth it.

And basically, anytime you’re stuck or you’re flailing or you’re aware of discomfort while you’re practicing or while you’re trying to get better at something, while you’re trying to learn something, NOPS is the acronym. And it stands for Notice it, so just be aware that it’s happening. Own it and basically say, “Okay, yes. This is happening to me. I’m not going to deny that I’m uncomfortable. I’m not going to deny that I’m out of my comfort zone. I’m just going to own the fact that yup, I’m out of my comfort zone,” which goes a long way towards alleviating anxiety which you need to get unstuck in this place.

The P in NOPS is really interesting. Push into it. And so what this actually means is yeah, if you can’t wrap your head around recursion, sit down and just write the stupid, simplest recursion program and write it over and over and over. Actually, the Push into it is actually push into the specific discomfort so if there’s something about it that you can identify that makes you uncomfortable, go there. Try to make yourself more uncomfortable is basically what push into it does. So if you’re in a social situation and you’re doing anxiety about talking to people, Notice it, Own it, Push into it means walk up to someone and start talking to them just to see how it makes you feel.

The value that I assign to this natural aptitude is more or less along the lines of we like to do things that we’re good at and we also get recognition for being good at things. And so whether we practice it because we want to be good at it and become good at it and get recognition or whether we have some kind of natural aptitude and we get recognized for doing something unexpected with it given our level or experience, I think that’s really all that it gets us. And the rest of it is effort. The rest of it is the time that we put in learning how to do it. And I think, as I said before, I think that can really trump the natural aptitude for some of these things.

So the 10,000 hours is not 10,000 hours of doing something. It’s 10,000 hours of a very deliberate type of effort to take you to a level, a degree of proficiency that is very, very rare. The 10,000 hours rules is about people who are at the very top of their field, the very, very edge of what is currently possible in a field.

KATRINA:  I read a lot about practice in my quest to become better at things like physics and math and later programming. My reading of this is a couple of things. People say that practice makes perfect. This apparently is wrong. Practice makes permanent. So practicing something will make it, it will optimize the neural pathways that you use to do that thing. So if you’re practicing something wrong, you will end up being permanently wrong. So that’s one important part of practice.

Another thing that I’ve found about practice, or read about practice, is that there are very many different types of practice. And you do them for different purposes. So the basic five types of practice that I’ve come across and thought a lot about are drills, where you focus on a specific skill, a very, very narrow skill. And you have a lot of repetition and a really, really close, tight feedback loop. And you do it over and over to embed something more deeply neurologically.

Then you have simulations where it’s like a safe environment to do something that is real-ish. So in sports, that’s where you have these games that are not official games. You just play against your teammates in pretend situations. And these often optimize for adding the types of things that you might hit three times in a season. But you’re optimizing the simulation so that you get it over and over and over again so that you can become better at being more flexible in those types of situations.

And then there is case studies where you observe and reflect and think deeply and analyze. I usually hear about case studies in people doing MBAs and that sort of thing. But it’s also very typical in a lot of different fields, for example in chess, where people will study a particular board or a particular game and try to imagine or determine what the next move is going to be.

JAMES:  Very good [inaudible]

KATRINA:  Yeah, and then they go check that against what the actual grandmaster did in that game next. And then when they discovered that they don’t have the same idea as the grandmaster, they try to figure out, “Okay, why is the choice that the grandmaster made probably a better choice?” And then you have what musicians and dancers and circus acrobats do, which is direct practice where you have a particular piece that’s a performance piece and you practice it until you know it so by heart that you can focus on the higher-level details of nuance and all that.

And then you have imitation, which is a really interesting one, which I think probably is one of the oldest ways of learning that you have with old apprenticeships from the middle ages. And doing exactly what a master does without any judgment about why you’re doing it or what you’re going to learn from it. And then in retrospect, discovering what you’ve learned from it.

And I think Kathy Sierra’s been talking about this quite a bit lately, that in the beginning it’s way better to expose you to good stuff than bad stuff. We have this idea that you should see lots of different things and that you can’t really know what good stuff is until you’ve seen the bad stuff. And that may be accurate at higher scope levels and stuff. But at the lower scope levels, being exposed to good techniques and stuff is super, super valuable. And if you’re practicing that from day one, think about it this way. when you’re learning to program, if one of the first things you learn is write small methods, how far will that get you? Pretty far, right?

And I think one of the really good things about what Kathy Sierra, or one of the interesting things about what Kathy Sierra has been talking about is exposing beginners to lots and lots and lots of good code is they won’t necessarily know why it’s good but they’ll have developed some sort of instinct and that they will start recognizing things that maybe later, maybe months later, they’ll be able to articulate why this is a good thing, particularly in comparison with some of the newer things that they’re seeing that are bad.

KATRINA:  Well there’s something really satisfying about being able to get something done. So that if you’re writing a 100-line method, you’re totally getting it done. It’s working. You’re delivering value. And now if you’re going to have to go learn how to do something that you don’t know how to do, it’s uncomfortable because you’re going to suck at it. And it’s really hard to suck at things. For me. Other people are probably better at it. But I hate sucking at stuff.

 There’s a meme going around the internet right now that just says, “Remember, sucking at something is the first step to becoming sort of good at something.”

In programming we have a similar thing. We have code smells, which is how we learn to recognize that code is sick, so to speak. And we know these things we’re supposed to avoid. It’s come to my attention recently that one of the largest differences, I believe, between a programming novice and a programming expert is that we can filter these criteria. I’ll tell you what I mean by that.

I got one a while back about somebody who’d been listening to our show and they read Sandi Metz’s Cdr and several other things. They’ve basically gotten themselves to the point where they were getting a solid understanding of all of the things that are at play when we write software. So I need small methods and I need to do this and I need to do that. The problem was they were taking all of those things and trying to apply them all at once. And when you do that, you’re basically penalized.

And somehow, experienced programmers seem to develop this intuition of which criteria applies right now. Oh yeah, I know we’re usually supposed to do this, but in this case that’s not the most important thing. In this case, the most important thing is that I follow this other rule and that’s going to make up for the fact that I’m [slagging] this one. And there may be situations where you can follow all the rules or maybe most of the rules. But there are definitely cases where you have to make tradeoffs like that. And I want to know how is it that we develop that? What is it that pushes us over that line, being able to filter that?

I have a hypothesis about this. I think that it has to do with choosing to follow only one rule to an extreme in a bunch of different situations and seeing where that plays well to you and where it really screws you up. What are the pain points? What are the tradeoffs that you are making by following this rule? And I think that that experience and that pain and those wins are the thing that let you recognize that this situation here is a lot like this other situation where following that rule was not the most important thing.

You notice a good technique and you decide to own it and then you push into it and stay with it and dial it up to eleven. And then you own it at that point. And then you can step back.

#### Tips on starting learning something.

KATRINA: The first thing is that it’s going to be painful. You’re going to suck and that has to be okay for at least 20 hours. And I think it’s very helpful when starting out to have a very small, very specific goal. Like I want to learn about Cassandra and so I will figure out how to take my log files and write it into something and then get out a time series. Or I want to have something that is very doable and very specific. I’m not going to read all the books about it. I want to be able to actually achieve some specific thing. And to me, starting to learn something new really has to involve doing something and not just thinking about something. Otherwise, I never get better at it.

JAMES: So it’s good if you have these little successes along the way, because you’re like, “Oh, I can do this. I’m getting this.” Whereas if you lay that whole mountain in front of you and start climbing, that’s a long way up.

AVDI:  I want to expand on that a little bit, just the idea of having a goal in mind. I think it’s incredibly important, particularly with tech learning. I’m not sure how much this applies to other areas. But with tech, tech learning I’ve found that I absolutely have to have an excuse to learn something. I’ve tried over and over again to learn things just for the sake of learning them. And I do. I still do it from time to time.

But when it comes to programming languages or new database technologies or whatever, if I don’t actually have an application for it, it’s not going to happen. I’ll pick up a few things about it, but the actual learning is not going to happen. You have to have an excuse. And the excuse can be, and often is, an actual need in an application that you’re developing, in which case it should be not an application that you’re developing because you wanted to have that excuse but actually an application that you really want to have. Because you need that impetus.

AVDI:  That’s a great question. When they were first coming out, I think I feel this and I suspect that we all feel this at times, is that when there’s a new technology or a bunch of new related technologies coming down the pipe, we feel compelled to get on top of it and know all about it. Because we’re geeks and we’re developers and we need to be on top of this stuff. And I think that’s true up to the point of you need to be aware of what these things do. you need to be aware of what the point of these things are, which might mean hunting down somebody who’s using them in production and saying, “Okay, what the heck is the point of using Mongo? Why are you doing it?” But that’s the end of it until you actually run into a problem where you really, really do need it.

As far as I can tell, if I’ve done some inquiring around things like MongoDB and some of the other NoSQL stuff, as far as I can tell the only time you actually really need it is in applications where you’re doing tons and tons of writes. You’re just consuming enormous amounts of information from everywhere and lots and lots of clients are writing to you and you don’t have time. You don’t need the ACID compliance of a full relational database. And you don’t have time for the ACID compliance of a full relational database. You just have this massive scale of tons of writes.

And there are a few other use cases for the Mongo case, like there are certain very specific types of documents where that makes sense to store in a DB like that. So that’s how much I know at this point. I’ve done a little asking around and I understand maybe three triggers which would make me, in an application, which would make me say, “Okay, I think this actually calls for Mongo.” And at that point, I will have a great excuse to learn MongoDB inside and out. But until that point, I’ve given myself license to not care.

AVDI:  I think there are a lot of moving parts in what we do. And I do think there is a fundamental difference between programming and, say competitive swimming just in that there are performances, there’s performance and then there’s creation. And it’s hard to even draw parallels between getting better at a performance, whether it’s a performance of a physical feat or a musical passage, versus getting better at creating things. I don’t know. It seems like we don’t have metrics. But what you can do is you can observe yourself traveling from the point of inspiration to the point of delivery. And you can make notes along the way, say about what are the things that slowed me down. And you can make sure that the things that slow you down next time are not the same things that slowed you down the last time.

KATRINA:  I think mistakes are really interesting. I think that they’re a way that, it’s a thing that you can use very deliberately and say, “Okay, I’m going to do this thing,” and then I’m going to step back and say, “What do I not like about what I just did?” And even just considering that can give you ideas for maybe how you can do it differently next time. And then you change it a little bit and you step back again and ask, “What do I not like about this little thing that I did now?” And this can give you something to focus on. And I think it goes back to even though we don’t have metrics, we can set goals. We can be very specific about the thing that we want to try to improve.

JAMES:  So in the thread on Parley, one of the big topics, actually what started the thread, was how to read programming books, manuals, things like that. And there were a lot of good techniques given in the thread. And I think it might be worth it for us to just hit on some of those. I’ve been doing this a lot recently. Finally sat down and decided to learn JavaScript from the ground up and figure out all these things I didn’t know about it. So JavaScript, Jasmine, CoffeeScript, Backbone, et cetera. I’ve been spending a lot of time on that. I used these techniques I have for how to read books. And so I go about it.

DAVID:  You hit on an interesting point, that there are actually two or three different modes in which we can read. And I love the second one that you described there where you get away from the computer and just sit down. There are lots of techniques for reading for information and studying from books and trying to aggressively power your way through a tome of information. But we forget that there’s another way of reading, which is like sitting down with an old friend and, or with a new friend rather, and just chatting and just exchanging ideas. And it’s the sitting down by the fire with a good book, that kind of thing, is if the book is well-written, you can do that with a book. And yeah, you start at the beginning and you read to the end.

And so I talked in the pre-call about reading a book at about 80,000 words per minute. The reality was is I was familiar with all of the ideas already. I just needed them organized. And the book that I was reading organized those ideas for me. And so I was able to power through it very, very quickly. ‘Understanding Computation’ was a book that was full of new ideas for me, almost on every page. And it’s like hitting a speed bump every time. You turn the page and you go, “Ooh, new idea,” and I’ve got to sit with that and absorb it. And for those kinds of books, you can take your pick of whether you want to power through it or dive into it or whether you want to just sit and read it from one end to the other. Either way can be overwhelming, if you let it, which can be fun.

But yeah, the only thing I would add to what you said, James, about the first way of reading is that if you really want to aggressively attack a book and just shove it into your brain, is do those steps where you start at a high-level scope and work lower and lower and lower. Do those explicitly and actually in writing. So sit down and say, “I’m going to spend 60 seconds deciding if I want to read this book or not.” And that is your purpose for the next 60 seconds. So you read the dust jacket and the front and the back and skim the table of contents and that sort of thing. And then at the end you write down, do I still want to read this book? Yes or no. You write, yes I do. Okay, now I’m going to take two minutes and I’m going to get the lay of the book. I’m going to get the layout.

There’s a thing called information retrieval bias and what it means is that we tend to value information more if we had to go get it ourselves. So if you’re just reading casually and you stumble across something on the page, that can be fun and it can be a good lesson, but you emotionally you will value that less than if you already were looking for that answer and you had already formulated that question. And that’s what, when I power through a book at the high-levels, I will write out what I want at each level of abstraction, finer and finer detail, to the point where I’ll write out, “This chapter I want this information. Can Ruby do threading and how?” and that sort of thing. And then when I hit the answer, I’m like, “Aha! I have it.” And information retrieval bias causes me to value that information more and I will lock it into my memory faster and more deeply.

KATRINA:  So there’s this distinction that you’re making between gaining information, like getting facts, and retrieving facts and understanding. Understanding is different from information. And understanding something deeply is completely different from recall. And I think that how you read a book is going to depend on what you need to get out of that. If it is a deep understanding, you’re going to read it in a very different way than if all you really want to know is comparing different NoSQL databases or non-relational databases with each other.

DAVID:  Absolutely. So there’s a trick for that. I guess I’ll throw this in. this is one of my picks. But a lot of my learning brain hacks center around shotgunning information into my brain. I do this silly party trick where I can go to the whiteboard and I can have the crowd shout out a list of 20 things that they want me to go to the store and buy. And I will write them on the whiteboard as fast as they shout them out. Well, as fast as I can write. And by the time I get to number 20, I can put the marker down, I could turn around and face the audience and I can then recall the entire list. And if you give me an item, I can tell you what number it was. And if you give me a number, I could tell you what the item is. They’re completely locked. I can access it like an array by index. And it’s a party trick. It’s a brain trick.

But it’s immensely powerful for learning and understanding because you can’t learn a book by osmosis. You can’t put your textbook under a pillow and sleep on it and wake up knowing calculus. But if you can load all of the facts, way more facts. A human can repeat five to seven things in short term memory. What if you could keep a hundred things in your short term memory and churn them over all at the same time? And the answer to that what if is you very quickly start seeing patterns, because you’ve got a larger dataset in your working memory. And you start making connections between things. And so it really drives home the interrelationship between the data.

AVDI:  If I read a tech book at all, unless it’s just a reference, and even when it’s a reference, I read books straight through. I don’t always make myself spend lots of time on each page. Sometimes it might be close to skimming. But for me, it’s all about making myself aware of where to find the information that I need when I need it. Sometimes, I read patterns books all the way through. And I don’t spend a lot of time on each pattern. But I make sure that I’m just aware of what it is and what it’s there for. And that means that someday, I’m going to be working on a problem and it’ll pop into my head. Oh yeah, this triggers a memory, and I’ll go back and I’ll look it up in detail. But I tend to use that for a lot of tech books. I just read it all the way through, but I make sure I’m just filing away where to find stuff.

AVDI:  Yeah. I do like to read a whole book. Before I tackle a programming language, I’ve always liked to read an entire book first, and maybe do a few, a little bit of practice while I’m reading it. But I like to go from beginning to end. Because what I really hate is just not knowing whole areas or now being aware of whole areas as I’m working with a new technology or a new programming language. Because I find that I can waste a lot of time if I’m using a programming language where a lot of its power lies, let’s say in macros, but I’m not actually using macros yet because I never learned about them. I feel like that can waste a lot of time.

So I want to be aware of the landscape and so I’ll read from beginning to end and something. And then I’ll reference back as I actually hit stuff that I’m practically doing. I’m also pretty free with the highlighter as I go through a book. Whether it’s an eBook, e-Readers mostly allow highlighting these days, or a physical book, I tend to mark things up a lot. I’ll mark up a sentence that either caught my attention or that seems like it sums up the point of a series of paragraphs. And then as I’m flipping back through it in the future when I’m trying to find that one thing that I remember, usually that one thing that I’ll remember will be something that I highlighted. And it’ll be easy to find.

JAMES:  All the different exceptions and how they inherit from each other. And I would always go to that page. Which one do I want to throw here?

DAVID:  Yeah. I went through the Pickaxe reference with little Post-it tape flags. And I just flagged everything. I should back up a little bit. I am different from you Avdi in that I am very comfortable with having blind spots. And so I actually wrote a blog post about this a few months ago called ‘Teach yourself a new programming language in 21 minutes. Or two to three years, it depends.’ And basically, it’s still this top-down approach. You take five minutes and ask yourself do I really need to learn this programming language?

And I’ve never needed to learn makefiles. I’ve needed to manipulate them several times over my career, but it’s never been worth learning how to write a makefile. So I always have to go look it up every single time. And I’m okay with that. And I’ve just made that decision. But at the end of the process of going top-down, I do end up at the same place you are, which is where I know where everything is in the book. I might not have read all of the sections because I may have gotten down to a very low level and at the level above I decided, oh this is the exceptions or the macros chapter and I don’t need to know that right now. I know where it is but I’m not going to try and read it right now.

AVDI:  Yeah, and I apply that even to stuff that I use every day. That’s not just for something that I use occasionally. I don’t feel any compulsion whatsoever to memorize things. I was looking at some of those techniques for reading in the thread on Parley and there was this whole endless blog post about this elaborate system that somebody uses involving space repetition and building up sets of flash cards. And I was just staring at this in incredulity because I don’t understand why. I have so many pieces of technology for looking up information. I don’t understand why I would spend any time trying to commit things to my memory. Some things I use so often that they commit themselves to memory. It’s like a well-optimized cache on a CPU.

Sometimes I use a piece of Ruby so often that it commits itself to my memory. And that’s fine. Okay, I don’t need to look that up anymore. But I’m never going to be like, “Oh, I feel bad for looking up a particular Rails method or something like that. I should really memorize that.” If I haven’t used it enough times to automatically memorize it, to just have my brain cache that automatically, then I don’t feel any compulsion to force myself to do it. I think that’s just wasting brain space. I’m used to looking things up every few minutes as I code. And I think that’s normal.

I always remember, for me I realize that Arthur Conan Doyle is not a reputable source of neurological information. It always reminds me of Sherlock Holmes’ statement when he was confronted with Watson’s amazement that he didn’t know whether the earth revolved around the sun or the sun revolved around the earth. He was like, “That’s not relevant to my crime-solving and it would take up limited space in my limited-spaced brain. So I toss that out so that I have more room for other knowledge.”

AVDI:  See, I’m comfortable with the sense that I have, when I confront something like that, “Wait a minute,” my spider sense is tingling that there is a way to do this with core methods. And then I go look in the appropriate documentation and I found out that way. But I’m content with that spider sense that says there is something here that I don’t know but I know it exists. I don’t feel the need to actually commit all that stuff to memory as opposed to just knowing it exists.

DAVID:  So an interesting thing that I’ve observed is that not memorizing large banks of stuff is common among people who are high up on the Dreyfus scale. Einstein was famous for not knowing his own phone number. And when pressed on the subject, he’s like, “Why would I waste brain cells committing to memory something I can easily look up in a book?” It’s even an alphabetically organized book. But on the other hand, Katrina mentioned as well, needing to memorize is common among people that are at level one or two on the scale who want to get up into the middle of the scale. I’m in your camp now where I very rarely will aggressively memorize things.

JAMES:  I think it’s obviously clear from this conversation that we have different systems and different things work for different people. I would argue Avdi that even your system is pretty deliberate, that you’re purposefully laying out this map in your mind so that when you find yourself wandering in the woods, you at least know where to look. And that alone is a massive preparatory step, in my opinion.

DAVID:  I’ve never cared enough to ask, honestly. I’m kind of a sociopath. But yeah, we’ve all talked, right? We’ve all spoken at conferences. And like Avdi said, if you want to learn something, give a talk on it. And it’s not just because it will force you to learn the basics of it, but because it will force you to learn some of the edge cases and the intricacies of it and the reasons behind it and the pain points and how to compensate for them.

#### Picks
- Mastery by Robert Greene
- 5 Elements of Effective Thinking
- Cal Newport: So Good They Can't Ignore You.
- Josh Kaufman: The First 20 Hours Ted Talk
- PhotoReading Personal Learning Course
- ‘The Making of an Expert’ and it’s by Ericsson and his colleagues, the people who were the originators of the 10,000 hours idea.
- Joe Kutner about The Healthy Programmer on The Freelancers’ Show
- Vegas Pro plugin Vegasaur
- LastPass
- HelloSign

## 129 RR Sharpening Tools with Ben Orenstein

I’m a huge believer in the power of habits. I think the things you can manage to make yourself do regularly can have incredible results. And so, a few years ago, I’d say five years ago, I decided to get kind of serious about making my environment really excellent and improving my efficiency that way. And so, I got in this habit of spending the first ten or 15 minutes of my day on tool sharpening. And so, what I started was I started a little text file that I would add to during the day. So, when I was doing something that felt inefficient or felt like whenever I had that inkling, “There must be a better way of doing this,” I’d add it to the list. And then I’d pull one of them off in the morning.

And so, I started most mornings by just doing something simple like making an alias for a command I use in the shell a lot. Or something like, I finally need to research how the Vim expression register works and go do some diving on a readme or something like that. And I thought of it as sort of slowly sanding down the rough edges of my environment. So, anything that kind of like irked me, I would try to spend a little time on every morning. And what I found was not very long of this, I was noticeably faster at the things I needed to do every day. And it was starting to have a huge impact on my productivity. And so, I started talking about that.

__Keep a tool sharpening list.__

To me, I spend a lot of my time on my own machine. And the changes and optimizations I’ve made have sped me up substantially. In a way, it’s some of my secret sauce, I think. It’s probably why I’m so fast at certain things. My vimrc at this point is almost ten years old. It’s got ten years of improvements in there. And that’s actually pretty huge.

But I will say that I do pay the penalty, which is I’m lousy to pair with. Everything is remapped.

it’s not about speed. It’s going back to what you said earlier Ben about anything that irked you. It’s the rough edges. It’s the annoyances. 

I was actually going to say that a different way and that is it’s about flow. And if you can stay in the flow, in the groove, while you’re working, then you get more done. You feel more satisfied with what you did as opposed to when you have those interruptions. Even if they’re small ones, it breaks that flow and it interrupts the way that you work. And that’s really what it boils down to usually for me, when I optimize something like that.

I don’t know if I explicitly set out with that goal. I got lucky in picking Vim a long while back and finding out that it’s insanely customizable. But I haven’t thought about that for new tools so much, except to think that I almost could never leave Vim because of how great it is for me now.

One thing I do is I embrace my typos. Sometimes I come across a variable that shows up in my app a lot that I just cannot type correctly and I’ll just do an alias for the incorrectly typed version to the correctly typed version.

I’m pretty good at writing macros. I’m usually reasonably aggressive about using them when I have to make a bunch of changes. There’s a little bit of an art to writing a macro that you can just replay a bunch of times. It’s like writing a little generalized procedure for text editing. But once you get the hang of it, you can use them to do some pretty impressive things.

If you watch his Destroy All Software videos and stuff, he talks about it some in there. But in a project, he will just map leader keys in Vim on the fly. Like I’m doing this thing a lot where I bounce over and run this test or something and so he will just define that as leader key there while he’s working.

And if I have one-off tasks for a project, I’m pretty good at writing macros. I’m usually reasonably aggressive about using them when I have to make a bunch of changes. There’s a little bit of an art to writing a macro that you can just replay a bunch of times. It’s like writing a little generalized procedure for text editing. But once you get the hang of it, you can use them to do some pretty impressive things.

So, I can’t type initialize either. I have a thing that expands to that entire method, actually.

There’s a meditation in practicing typing. But that gets down to flow. So if you want to stay in flow, you can eliminate your mistakes or you can embrace your mistakes. So when you practice typing something correctly, you can eliminate that mistake. I sort of embrace that, “Hey, my fingers want to type initialize incorrectly all the time.” So, let’s just say that’s okay and figure out a way to get around it.

So, I have one of these typo situations where instead of git push I would type git pusa over and over again. So I said, “Okay, well this is dumb. Let me just map git pusa to git push.” So I did that for a while. And I was like, “Why am I typing such a long thing all the time?” So, I re-aliased that to g push. No, so I wanted to go to gp eventually. It was my final destination. I was like, “Okay, let’s do two characters.” Only I kept typing my old alias which was gpush, one word. So then, when I realized I wasn’t using gp, I had gpush just echo “Use gp” and then actually call gp itself. So, I got a little reminder every time I use my wrong slightly longer alias.

This is actually a really good habit. When teaching other people, when they do the long version, I try to make them do the short version afterwards three times in a row. And one of the things that I do in Vim is I disable the commands that I don’t want to be using anymore. So, if people come on my computer, I’ve disabled escape, I’ve disabled backspace, and I’ve disabled the arrow keys. And I’m working on maybe disabling hjkl.

There’s big value in that. And this is something I recommend in basically all my Vim talks, which is when I’m trying to learn a new command, if I realized I’ve missed an opportunity to use it, I’ll back up and then redo it using the correct command. Because the thing you’re trying to build is that muscle memory. You’re trying to build that automatic, “I want this to happen therefore my fingers just do the right thing.” And you don’t get that if you don’t actually think, “Hey, I need this to do this,” and then experience it happening with the right command.

Right after this call, I’m going to go disable capital Q in vim.

When I give Vim talks, I always tell people don’t use the arrow keys. 

I look at the field of things that I don’t know and determining the things that I want to level up on can be really daunting sometimes. There’s so much out there.

BEN:  It’s basically sorted by agony.

If you haven’t used Hipmunk before, it’s a service for searching flights and their default sort is agony, which I think is great. And agony is a combination of how long your layovers are, how long the total travel time is, how much it costs, and it folds in a bunch of different factors. And that’s what my sorting is by. It’s just this general sense of what’s going to give me a good payoff because I do it a lot versus how painful is it when I have to do it manually. It’s a combination of a few different things.

I’ve written a lot of Ruby over the last couple of years and I’m okay at it. I’ve written a lot of Rails apps in particular, so I’m getting the hang of Rails in general, but I haven’t forced myself into a wildly new programming paradigm in a little while. So I’m trying to be better about this. I’ve been dabbling around with Clojure and a little bit of Elixir and I have this goal of giving myself a couple of different projects that are wildly outside the realm of web programming. So I want to build a little interpreter or compiler or something, maybe some sort of graphics programming and just peel off one or two projects that are really different than what I do every day to force myself out of my comfort zone.

I’ve actually planned a retreat for myself in February. I was on Twitter lamenting that I haven’t read all of SICP, the Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, which is what MIT uses to teach its computation classes. And I was lamenting. I was like, “I can’t believe I haven’t read this whole thing. It’s like the bible for writing programs.” And Chris Hunt who’s someone I know from some conferences, works at GitHub, was saying, “Oh man, I had to Google what that was.” So I was like, “We should totally just get a cabin and go read that book for a couple of weeks,” and he’s like, “I’m in.” So in February, I’m going. We actually ended up choosing Costa Rica. And we got a place near the beach and we’re going to basically bring the book and not come out until we’ve read the whole thing and done a bunch of exercises.

When we talk about sharpening tools, I think about the tools that I use to write code but not my understanding of programming or my ability to write different languages. I think of those as two different things. Do you think of them more as the same thing?

That’s a good question. I don’t know. I haven’t pondered it actively. At the end of the day, it’s like how good are you at getting things done with code when you want to? So I think the tools are part of that and if you improve the tools, you’ll be a little faster for certain reasons. And if you improve the wetware of your brain by becoming a better programmer and having knowledge of more techniques and things to try, that probably also helps. So, I think if you consider it as you have one end goal which is working software that does something, I think it is just a continuum.

It really adds to your understanding of things, too. just whipping open an editor and making it do something different, once you’ve done that you get a new appreciation for how does this thing work and what can I make it do when I really want to, or things like that. And that information, you go forward with that information. In the future you may decide, “Well this is a new little mini-language I’m using, so maybe it makes sense to write a grammar for my particular editor so that it can syntax highlight it correctly,” or things like that. It expands your thinking a bit.

I did an automation one time. I have it tab complete when I’m doing ssh commands or scp commands when I’m copying a file off of a server. I went through and made it work so that I can start typing a directory name and I can tab complete it on the remote server. And it was neat to figure out what was involved in that. Obviously, I have to make some kind of connection and get a listing of the files at that point and filter it out. It was cool.

I think that this process of beginning to make the world around you conform to what you would like expands in a grand way where you start seeing yourself as someone who can affect the world. And it becomes a lot more than about your tools or about your skills or about figuring out how to write a script. But seeing that, “Oh, this thing out there in the world doesn’t work the way it should or it’s too painful or it’s too complicated, and I can fix that.”

I think I’ve always had a healthy disregard for the way things are “supposed to work”. I’ve always been a little bit of a disruptive force in the organizations I’ve been a part of. When people are like, “Well, we don’t do it that way,” or, “No, it has to be like this. You need permission from that person,” or something, I disregard that pretty wildly and frequently. So, I guess it’s not shocking that I feel that way in my tools. I feel that way in my code. I feel that way in organizations I’m in. That’s just a general mentality, I suppose.

I don’t have a lot of patience for things that seem foolish or slow or just could be improved. I’m very fortunate to be at thoughtbot which is a company that really, really embraces changing processes for the better. There’s almost no resistance towards change. If you can make a reasonable case for why it will be better, which is really an amazing thing. But I’m reasonably frequently a person that will try to make some change happen when it seems like something is broken.

I had a nightmare of a first programming job. It was a wonderful job in the sense that they took me with no experience and were willing to train me and gave me that first credential of has worked professionally as a programmer before to get me on my way. But in pretty much every other sense, it was awful.


So for instance, they gave everybody 15-inch monitors or 13-inch or some tiny screen. And being a developer, if I have more screen real estate, I will really be faster. I will make you more money if you buy me a bigger monitor. So, I made this case and was turned down. I said, “Okay, well you’re making the completely wrong decision but fine. What I’m going to do is go out and buy my own.” So, I went out and bought my own and said, “Okay, I just want to let you guys know I bought my own monitor and I’m going to be bringing this in.” And they said, “No, you can’t do that because if you do and it catches on fire, our building isn’t covered by that insurance policy so you can’t even fix this yourself.”

And there were a lot of other examples like this where the process was what the process was and they really, really didn’t want anyone to disrupt it. And I was completely miserable. And I almost got fired from this job. And I thought at the time it was because I was a really bad worker or I was really lazy or something. I felt really bad about it. But when I think back on it now and I look at what I’m able to do today, I think it was really just that I was extremely unhappy because I had no ability to shape my environment and it just completely sapped all my motivation and happiness.

I think in companies that aren’t so pathologically averse to change, then absolutely. I wouldn’t tell everyone as a blanket statement that if you’re unhappy because your job has some bad processes, you should quit. But sometimes, that is the right answer. I think maybe on average, people are a little too afraid to try to change processes where they work. I have a lot of friends that will tell me, “I can’t go over there and get this promotion because this VP hasn’t approved it,” or something.

How do you get better at pushing the right leaders? I think you just start small. It’s harder to change certain things. So I think you start with little stuff. And then you work your way up to the bigger things you want to ask for. I think that’s probably the best way to do it. For instance, the one I think a lot of people screw up is it starts with your salary negotiation. So it starts before your first day at the job. I know a lot of people that are offered X and they say, “Great, sounds good,” and then they sign and that’s it.

And if I could convince every person in the world that ever takes a job to just answer that with one thing, it’s, “Well, I was really hoping for X plus whatever,” anything that you feel comfortable with, and just see what they say, I think people on average could be making a lot more money. And so it starts with little things like that, just being willing to negotiate and push back just a hair every once in a while. And then you build up to the bigger things.

One of the things with smaller companies is that they’re not getting everything they want done anyway, so if you’re finding a way to get something done, they’re just going to thank you for it.

They also tend to have fewer codified policies and procedures. If there’s an employee handbook that officially spells out something, once they’re like, “Okay, we’re a grownup company now and we need an HR department and we need to have policies in place to handle all the scenarios that come up,” that’s when I think you tend to find the most resistance to change because it’s like, “Well it says right here in the employee handbook that no, you can’t take a month off.” But when you’re in a smaller company, they haven’t had that parental oversight come in and so you just go talk to the CEO who’s one level removed from you, or maybe two, and say, “Hey, I want to do this thing,” and they say, “Well, okay. We haven’t done this before but that’s fine.”

__I think people, they tend to not try to improve things enough. I think they also tend to not quit enough. There are so many jobs out there and there are so many different companies that have different cultures and different ways of doing things that I often see people struggling to try to make something work that is probably never going to work when the company and you would both be happier if you went and did your thing somewhere else. I think a lot of people have a fear of letting go of that job and they probably shouldn’t.__

When you’re in a tough situation, you can either move to a different situation (improve the situation) or improve yourself. So when you’re stuck in a job you don’t like, you can either fix what’s wrong with the job, you can quit and go take a different job, or you can change something about yourself, maybe it’s learning a new skill or what have you. And I think depending on what’s up in the whole situation, one of those choices is going to be better than the other sometimes. So I think that quitting is a great thing to do in a lot of cases, but it’s not like the, “Oh yeah, I just want to quit this job.”

So I think that the tool sharpening, it’s great at the technical and the scripting and the tool use level. But there’s also stuff you could do at the organizational level and process and interpersonal. Even things like, “Hey, let’s use something like Pivotal Tracker in this project,” which can change the focus of what you’re doing from, “Oh, I’m trying to bang on JIRA to get it to work right,” to, “Oh, now I’m not wasting all the time on that. We can actually spend more time talking about the issues that we’re trying to solve.”

Alfred, SizeUp (window management), Vimium for Chrome.

The thing for me is I view going to the mouse as a [cache miss]. It’s like my hands are already on the keyboard and now I have to move them all the way over to the slow part of the world. Like I’ve gone down to disk– But my hands were already on the keyboard. So if I could have done this with the keyboard then this would have been faster. I would have saved that travel time.

Kinesis keyboard.

Yeah, I think we haven’t hit the limits of human ability to control these things. Foot pedals plus a little voice control plus both hands, I think we can be folding this all together into something pretty awesome.

The most important one is I work at a standing desk at home and we have standing desks here at thoughtbot. I think the best tool sharpening is not sitting all day, because sitting is the slow death. Anything that gets you moving more is better. So when I’m sitting, I sit in the Aeron which I like, has nice support, has a keyboard tray to get my hands a little bit lower so they’re in a comfortable position and that keyboard is easy on my hands. I had some RSI issues a few years ago, which was really scary. And I actually delayed taking my job at thoughtbot because I was battling these issues and I was worried I was going to start my first day and be, “Oh, I can’t program for a couple of weeks, you guys.” So I started getting really serious about my setup. And that’s when I made those changes. Keyboard tray, Aeron chair, good keyboard. Recently added in the standing desk routine. And those have all been really good. Because the most important tool is your health. You’ve got to keep that sharp. If you’re sick or hurting, in pain, you’re not going to be able to do good work. So you’ve got to really stay on top of that stuff. And it’s so much easier to instill good habits and to try to be healthy now than to try to erase some nasty damage you’ve done by a few years of bad habits. So even if you’re not feeling these pains or worried about those right now because you’re 20 and it doesn’t seem like a big deal, I’d encourage you to try to get in good habits early and never have to worry about it.

GeekDesk standing desk.

Which is great because it goes up and down. Because standing all day isn’t awesome either. You want to be able to alternate between the two. Or at least I do. That’s what works best for me. So I mix between bouts of each. Very happy with the GeekDesk.

Vivobarefoot shoes.The theory is, look, you are an incredible machine that has been evolved over billions of years and you are designed to have your heel flat on the ground and your foot already has shock absorption, and it already has balance structures and it has support for your arch. It has everything you need and all the stuff that modern shoes give you is wrong and should be avoided. And so it’s like a seven millimeter patch of rubber that you stand on and nothing else. And it just lets your foot do its thing. And it’s already changed how I walk, which is crazy to me. I didn’t realize I was doing what they call heel striking. It’s not normal to drop all your weight on your heel as your stride moves forward. It’s more natural to place your foot down in a more balanced position and spread the weight out. But when you have shoes with thick heels on like sneakers or dress shoes, that’s the position you take. You start heel striking. So I have this as part of my gait. And I switched to these shoes and suddenly I’m slamming my heels on the ground and I can suddenly feel it for the first time. I’m like, “Wow, this is all messed up.” So I’ve been relearning how to walk, which is not something I thought I’d say at 30. But I’m totally happy with them. I feel better after wearing them. And when I stand all day in dress shoes versus when I stand all day in these shoes, it’s marked difference. It’s vastly better.

I view that with the whole tool sharpening thing, that as I dig into these processes and stuff and it has that trying these automations that I find new ways of leveraging things. I realize I no longer have to make this mistake where I forget to fire up Foreman instead of the Rails server because I have a habit to just go through this automation anyway. So if I just make that automation smart enough to make the right decision, then it just changes how things work.

Little things. We had a whole episode on coding environments where we talked about the things that weren’t writing code but the stuff that was in support of them. So I think that there’s a fair amount of overlap between that episode and what we’ve been talking about today.

I’m going to be a bit of a politician. I’m going to rephrase that question to a question that I’d rather answer, which is what’s the lamest thing I’ve done that I’m most proud of, which is my favorite remapping is I had mapped ctrl+S to the escape :w enter. So I basically gave myself a little save shortcut in vim. Leave insert mode, write the file, hit enter. And I calculated that one time. I think this saved me about a million keystrokes per programming career. And I use it, I don’t know, probably 500 times a day, maybe more. And it’s a stupid thing where it goes from escape :w enter, four keystrokes to two. But those two keystrokes get repeated so often that the savings is actually monstrous. And when you’re thinking about RSI like I am, saving a million keystrokes is a pretty big deal if you want to be programming when you’re old and gray. So that’s one of my things that I remap instantly when I’m on someone else’s computer. I just say, “I’m sorry but I have to have this command,” and then I just map C+S to that. And they’re usually okay with that.

The cool thing in this process is that you’re always measuring. You talked about how that keystroke felt natural to you, but then you’re like, “So how many keystrokes will that save me?” And I noticed in your GoGaRuCo talk you’re like, “Let’s sort my history by occurrence and stuff to see how often am I using these commands,” and stuff like that. I think that’s awesome that you have this built-in metrics analysis system.

Wow. Somebody should write a profiling tool. Like we have the profiling tools, statistical profiling where they’re just checking where your code is every millisecond or something. We could do the same thing for what we’re doing with our tools and see where we’re spending the majority of our time so that we know where to focus on.

So I have a command I run in my shell that basically pipes history and does some awking on it and does some sorting and things like that and shows me my 10 or 15 most-used shell commands. And I use that to see what I need to be more aggressive about aliasing. Like what am I typing out fully often that I don’t need to be? I don’t know of a thing like this for vim. I think Drew Neil who’s the creator of Vimcasts has started to work on this. I don’t know if he’s released it. But something that watches what you’re doing in Vim and records it and tells you, suggests optimizations that way. Because that would be handy to know.

Yeah, Josh made a pick recently for this program called Dash, a documentation viewer. And it has all these different modules you can get. Say you can have your Rails, your Ruby, your jQuery, your JavaScript documentations all in this one search bar and then you mentioned Alfred and you can install the Alfred plugins so you can literally just call up Alfred and I have it map to just an m in front of it for man. So it can just do that. And I picked it up after Josh mentioned it and was playing around with it. I can’t believe how quickly that changed things for me, just having all that documentation in one place and not having to Google it or go to the particular site that I cared about or whatever.

Kangaroo Hybrid Pro.