I wasn't sure that I was going to do this long term at that point, that it would turn into something that l really enjoy. But l really wanted to give back, because so many people gave so much to me in the Silicon Valley. I care deeply about wanting to do stuff for people.

The board thought Jeff was one of the brains, a creative guy, and that he needed operational help. Long story short, l went up there and worked with them for … l would guess about six weeks. I spent a lot of time with Jeff, we talked a lot, and l just thought that Jeff is a genius. I feel like people immediately assume that if you're Bezos or Steve Jobs, that if you're creative, you're not operational. But I think these people care even more about the outcome.… Jeff ultimately took over all the operations.

Brilliance can't be taught, but the operational stuff can be. Do you have operational instincts? Who cares? If you work with me for six months, I can give you enough prowess and process to be able to go run something, and really do something with it.

These 20-somethings turn into 30-somethings and then into late 30-somethings, and they land in positions of major influence. And sometimes they haven't been beaten up enough to know what they don't know. Some of these guys get to a point where they think that that brilliance is going to carry them without the process. But guys like Steve [Jobs] learned that they had to be both — run a great staff meeting, hire great people, and put them in right positions. They had to understand the manufacturer, the supply chain, the retail element. It's not just brilliance, but a lot of other stuff. Good people have both sides, but that's unique. Steve was one of them.

Another guy who can do both [operations and creative] is Ben Horowitz. He's got this computer science brilliance; he thinks deeply about products, etc. But he's a really good manager. Just look at Ben's blog — he has some fantastic posts. They're all instructive. He's one of these guys that says being a CEO doesn't come naturally; you've got to work at it. He's doing a book right now that I think will be the hottest seller in the Valley.

I want to come in there with a quantitative process and say, "Let me tell you what our stuff does and let me tell you based on our work what this can do for you in terms of your productivity." Every company I work with today, I tell them to hire investment banking or consultant types to be salespeople.

The fact is, if someone did all her homework, she could go in there and sit down with somebody and explain how our product was better than the others. I want somebody inside who is sitting at their computer doing all that analysis, and then they put that on a piece of paper or a computer screen and ship it to a guy that's out on the field: Here's what you've got, and here's what we can do for you.

One thing that helped me was learning that the intellectual property of an advertising agency is the creative. I worked at Jay Walter Thompson, which was a machine known for good research, good marketing, good positioning and mediocre creative. But if you're a big company like Proctor and Gamble or AT&T or General Motors, you don't give a shit about [ad agencies'] market research. They're going to hire the best guys out of school to do that. Instead, they went where the best creative was. So when I came out here, I had a great relationship with the creatives. My appreciation for engineering was enormously high, right at the beginning.

