# CS 183: Startup -- Notes Essay -- The Challenge of the Future

* Humanities: Learn about the world, no career skills.
* Engineering: Learn in technical detail, but not how they should apply their skills in the workforce.
* You need both!
* In most human societies, value is claimed and not created. There has been a recent shift to creating value as opposed to claiming.

#### Why Do a Startup?

* Doing startups for money is not a great idea. Research: People get happier and happier as they make more and more money, but only up to $70K/year. Then, the improvements are offset by factors such as stress, more hours, etc.
* A better desire would be to change the world.

#### Costs of Failure

* Startups pay less than bigger companies, so founding or joining one involves some financial loss. These losses are thought to be high, in reality they aren't that high.
* The non financial costs: You may have learned to fail, or you may become more risk averse. A 1 to n startup has especially low financial costs, but higher non-financial costs.
* From 0 to 1, ask yourself: *what is valuable, what can I do, and what is nobody else doing?* You know you are right when you say that "most people believe in X, but the truth is !X." 

---

### CS 183: Startup -- Notes Essay -- Party Like It's 1999?

* History is driven by each generation's excellence. Take the 1960s, there is an analog between its cultural intensity and the technological intensity of the 1990s. You have to have a handle on the history of the 90s to talk about business and startups in 2012.
* Most of the 90s was not the dot com bubble. What might be called the mania started in September 1998 and lasted for just 18 months. In the 1980s, Stanford was quite disconnected from the rest of the valley.
* Xanadu: the first network between models (1963). The problem was that you needed everyone to adopt it at once for the network to work, and it didn't.
* Netscape (1993) and its IPO in 1995 made the public aware of the Internet. It was weird because Netscape wasn't profitable at that time, and yet its stock reached $160/share from $14/share.

#### The Mania: September 1998-March 2000

* The Mania started in September of '98. Any tech ent from that time had scores of pretty insane anecdotes to tell. The times were extremely social. People were irrationally exuberant.
* PayPal's original idea involved beaming money to people over Palm Pilots. It was voted one of the 10 worst business ideas of 1999.
* They paid the customer money to use the product, it got buzz so it could raise more capital and continue on. 7-10% daily growth and 100 million users, but *no revenue*.
* On Feb 16, 2000, the WSJ ran a flattering piece that covered the company's exponential growth and gave it a valuation of $500M. The next month, when PayPal raised another round of funding, the lead investor accepted the WSJ's Feb 16 valuation as authoritative. Funding went crazy. A South Korean firm just wired $5M without signing a document. PayPal closed its $100M round on March 31st.
* Marketing-driven e-commerce companies failed in the first half of 2000, and B2B companies failed in the second. The telecoms followed in 2001. Paypal broke even in 2001 when it was able to solve some tough fraud problems and cx service problems. When it filed for IPO in late September 2001, PayPal became the first company to file after 9/11.

#### Lessons Learned

* People in Silicon Valley learned that you have to do things differently to survive in the Schadenfreude world. First, you had to believe and practice incrementalism. Second, your startup had to be "lean." You should not know what you're going to do. Instead, you should experiment, iterate, and figure it out as time goes on. Third, you should have zero advertising spend. If your growth isn't viral, it's fake.
* Sixth, rapid monetization was to be distrusted. Better is a more protracted growth base and later IPO. If you have a company that's growing relatively quickly, you should probably reinvest profits and make it grow even more quickly.
* Finally, you shouldn't discuss the future.

#### Bubbles

* *Bubbles arise when there is widespread, intense belief that is not true.* But people don't really believe in anything in our society anymore. The incredible narrative about a tech bubble comes from people who are looking for a bubble.
* To understand businesses and startups in 2012, you have to think for yourself. The question of what is valuable is a much better question than debating bubble or no bubble. The value question gets better as it gets more specific: *is company X valuable? Why?*

---

###CS 183: Startup -- Notes Essay -- Value Systems

* Certain questions and frameworks can anchor our thinking about value. The questions are necessarily personal: *"What can I do?" "What do I think is valuable?" "What do I see others not doing?" "What valuable company is nobody building?"*

#### Great companies do three things:

* They create value.
* They are lasting or permanent in a meaningful way.
* They capture at least some of the value they create. Airlines certainly create value and the public is better off because they exist. But the airlines themselves have never made any money. None can be considered a truly great company.

#### Valuation

* Software companies are often valued at around 10x annual revenues. Guy Kawasaki: pre-money valuation = ($1M * n_engineers) - ($500K * n_MBAs).
* Price-earnings ratio (P/E ratio or PER). The PER is equal to market value (per share)/earnings (per share). The PER is widely used but does not account for growth.
* Durability: More important than being the first mover is being the last mover. You have to be durable: in this case, business is like chess. Grandmaster Capablanca put it well: to succeed, "you must study the endgame before everything else."

####Capturing Value

* No to perfect competition XD. In perfect competition, no firms in an industry make economic profit. If there are profits to be made, then firms enter the market and the profits go away. If firms are suffering economic losses, some fold and exit. But if you're a monopoly, you own the market. Many great companies have one decisive advantage--economies of scale or uniquely low production costs--that make them at least monopoly-esque in some important way.
* Paypal was in the payments business, and there were considerable economies of scale in that business. You couldn't compete with the big credit card companies directly; to compete you had to undercut them. Paypal tried to do it in two ways: through *technical innovation* and through *product innovation*.
* Primary technical problem: fraud. It was so hard to stamp it out, but they did. Another key innovation: funding sources became cheaper. By modeling how much money was in an account, PayPal could make advance payments, circumvent the Clearing House, and make payments instantaneous from the user's perspective.
* The DOJ has 3 tests for evaluating monopolies.
	* Lerner index: How much market power a particular company has.
	* Herfindahl-Hirschman index. It uses an industry size to gauge how much competition exists for an industry.
	* M-firm. You take the 4 or 8 largest firms in an industry, and if the sum of their market shares > 70%, then that market is concentrated.

* *The more intense the competition, the less likely you'll be able to capture any value at all.* Thinking through this suggests that competition is overrated. Some people like competition, but most don't. Clearly, winning by a large margin is preferable to ruthless competition, if you can swing it.

---

### CS 183: Startup -- Notes Essay -- Class 4

Frame capitalism and perfect competition as opposites; capitalism is about the accumulation of capital, whereas the world of perfect competition is one in which you can't make any money.

Our bias favouring competition is deep-rooted. But in order to make money, you have to be skeptical about perfect competition. In the race to compete, we learn to confuse what is hard with what is valuable. Intense competition makes things hard because you just beat heads with other people. It becomes a proxy for value. But value is something else.

It seems odd--if the stakes are so small, why don't people stop fighting so hard and do something else instead? We can only speculate.

For a company to own its market, it must have some combination of brand, scale cost advantages, network effects, or proprietary technology. Amazon: scale advantage in the online world. Apple: has both hardware and software. First, you want to find, create, or discover a new market.

Big market: Too competitive to make money. A plan to scale is crucial. eBay: unexpected was the popularity of Pez dispensers; eBay became the single place where collectors can buy them. Then, you auction them out. A marketplace is a monopoly–if you're a buyer, you go where all the sellers are, and if you're a seller, you go where all the buyers are.

LinkedIn: was supposed to be a network for everyone. The reality is that it's largely just used for headhunting.

Twitter: small, niche product. Anyone can become a micro broadcaster. Even if it is small, it works. But as it scales you basically build a new media distribution centre. And while Twitter is incredibly easy to copy, you cannot replicate it because Twitter's market seems safe.

Zynga: Great execution from the beginning. They aggressively copied that worked, scaled, and figured out how to monetize these games better than anyone else. But how durable is it?

Groupon: Started small and scaled up aggressively. Groupon is a brand, and people look up to it and not others for deal. Anti-Groupon: no proprietary technology and no network effects. 

All these companies have the same pattern: start with a small market and then scale up.

Microsoft: probably the last OS company. Google: probably the last search company. SpaceX thinks it can cut space launch costs by 70-90%. If nothing has happened in an industry for a long time, and you come along and dramatically improve something important, chances are no one else will come and do that again, to you.

Frontiers and People
--------------------

One way to tell whether you've found a good frontier is to answer the question "Why should the 20th employee join your company?" If you have a great answer, you're on the right track. If not, you're not.

Why should an engineer join your company when they could go to Google instead and get more money and prestige? The right answer is that you're creating a sort of monopoly business.

CS 183: Startup -- Notes Essay -- Class 5
=========================================

Cult: not so good. Anti-culture (no culture) is pretty dominant. Sometimes, they become mercenaries. You want to be somewhere in the middle, gravitating to the cult side.

A robust company culture is one in which people have something in common that distinguishes them sharply from the rest of the world. You want your people to be different in a way that gives the company a strong sense of identity and yet still dovetails with the overall mission.

To succeed you probably need to work intensely, and do something that no one else is doing. Focus on an area that is not zero-sum.

Creators or Fighters?
---------------------

Engineers: good at problem solving. They will ignore the fact that there may be situations where you have to fight.

Athletes: motivated and competitive. If a company is made up of athletes, they will be biased towards competing, because historically, they've been good at it. So they will find areas with competition and jump into the fray.

You want to get a mix of both.

Stephen Cohen, Palantir: People must be talented, have a long-term time orientation, and they must have a generative spirit, where people are constantly creating. Culture creates these three aspects. 

Max Levchin: At the start, since you're underfunded and undermanned, you have to move fast. In a team, an n-squared communications problem emerges. The more diverse the group, the harder it is for people to find common ground. When in doubt, there's no doubt.

Good stuff shows itself. Talent shows itself. It doesn't talk about itself. You have to have some spider sense to look out for it. Watch what people show you instead of listening to what they're telling you. Smooth appearances are irrelevant to being good. The most talented folks are almost always quirky. Watch for the quirks and embrace them. You shouldn't judge people by the stylishness of their clothing; quality people often do not have quality clothing.

People who are smart and energetic are often angry. Not at each other, but angry that "they're not there yet." Disharmony at PayPal was actually a side effect of very healthy dynamics.

If people complain about people behind each other's backs, you have a problem. If people don't trust each other to do good work, you have a problem. But if people know that their teammates are going to deliver, you're good.

It is incredible important to surface issues quickly. Ideally everyone in an organisation is rowing in the same direction. At the micro level, details matter a lot. But there should be a strong, shared vision of the future. Concealing disagreements because people feel uncomfortable makes for disaster. They just sit undealt with, doing damage. If disagreements aren't surfacing, it's not because they are none. Key things are being covered up. Everyone moving together in lockstep is a big red flag, not an ideal.

Be wary of salary negotiators. You should run away from anyone who just wants salary instead of equity. Generally you want people to want stock. The best hires don't seem to care too much about money at all. They just don't want to get screwed. The best people are the ones who care to ask: "how much of the company is mine?"

Salespeople: Ask technical questions to combat their phenomenal sales skills. Break them, and watch what happens when they break. You need to build a team that has a lot of raw intelligence. You also need to hire someone who has sold a lot.

Q: How do you make a compensation package that ensures you get an engineer that's a good cultural fit?

There is probably some sum of money you could pay to any engineer to work at Palantir and give it their all for one year. But there is not sum of money that you could pay any engineer to go all-out for ten years. Humans can't muster that amount of sustained focus and energy if they don't love what they're doing.

Q: What if engineers are in love with something else?

One thing that's undervalued in the engineering world is over who long a term most of the value is built. When eBay bought PayPal, all the PayPal engineers left, and eBay had to hire them back as consultants at something like 3x their old salaries because it couldn't manage the codebase without them. Even really smart engineers couldn't replace them. So its worth targeting people who will be around a long time.

Never let anyone know how much each person is getting paid. Do not try this experiment. You cannot compete on financial terms with Google, you have to have that compelling monopoly narrative thingie we discussed already.

Engineers are very cynical, given that there is a large number of companies that are trying to recruit them in Silicon Valley right now. To win, you need to tell a story about cogs. At Google, you're a cog. With me, you're an instrumental piece of this great that we'll build it together. Articulate the vision. Don't even try to pay well. Just meet people's cash flow needs. It's not about cash, it's about breaking through the wall of cynicism.

The relevant Keynes line here is "when the facts change, I change my mind. What do you do?" But you don't want to let every new fact call what you're doing into question.

CS 183: Startup -- Notes Essay -- Thiel's Law
=============================================

Thiel's Law: A startup messed up at its foundation cannot be fixed. Founders should arguably stay in charge as lon as the paradigm remains 0 to 1. Once the paradigm shifts to 1 to n, the founding is over. At that point, executives should execute.

Consider a 2x2 matrix: on one axis you have good, high trust people and low trust people. On the other axis you have low alignment structure with poorly set rules and a high alignment structure where the rules are well set.

Good, high trust people: anarchy.
Low trust people and lot of rules: totalitarianism.
Low trust, low alignment: investment bank. Avoid this combination.
High trust, low alignment: The best! People trust each other and together create a good culture. But there's some good structure to it, too. People are rowing in the same direction, and not by accident.

CEOs get low salaries, and they believe that their equity will be worth a lot and they try to make it happen. That effect extends to the whole company because capping CEO pay basically means capping everyone's pay.

Don't hire consultants. Everybody has to be on board, rowing really hard in the same direction.

The Fundraising Process
-----------------------

Angels are the first significant outside investors in a startup. Ideally, they add experience, connections, and credibility. They need to be accredited.

Building a valuable company is a long journey. Founder will have dilution. Google: 15.6%. Steve Jobs: 13.5%. Mark Pincus (Zynga): 16%. If you have north of 10%, that's generally good. Dilution is relentless.

CS 183: Startup -- Notes Essay -- Follow the Money
==================================================

Many people who start businesses never deal with VCs, as they get the money from their families. VCs started in the late 1940s, with Sequoia, Kleiner Perkins, and Mayfield leading the field.

Venture works like this: you pool a bunch of money that you get from people called limited partners. Then you take money from that pool and invest it into portfolio companies that you think are promising. Hopefully those companies become more valuable over time and everybody makes money.

2% and 20% rule: VC firm charges 2% an annual management fee of the fund and then gets 20% of the gains beyond the original investment. Many companies don't make money and go to zero. But the idea is that the companies that do well get you all the money back and then some.

Power Law: If you look at Founder's Fund 2005 fund, the best investment ended up being worth about as much as all the rest combined. And the investment in the second best company was about as valuable as number three through the rest.

All else equal, having 1% of a company is better than having 0.5%. But the 100th employee at Google did much better than the average venture-backed CEO did in the last decade. You could spin this into argument against joining startups. The power law distribution simply means you have to think hard about a given company is going to fall on the curve.

One thing we should talk about is what secret VCs use to make money. Actually, most don't make money. So, let's talk about that.

Roelof Botha: The unprofitability of venture capital is very documented. Average returns have been pretty low for a number of years now. One theory is that when venture was doing well in the 1990s, it became a big deal to more or less blindly follow advice to put more money in venture. So the industry over invested.

VCs aren't evil or corrupt or anything. But in terms of getting a good deal and not a bad one, it's the same with any deal; the best way to get a good price is to have competition. VCs have to be competing to invest in you.

In practice, you never really land just one investor. Chances are you have at least two people who are interested or you have zero. Most VCs have little or no confidence in their ability to make decisions. They just wait to ape others' decisions.

Paul Graham: But investors also have an interest to wait and study , if they can. VCs are cool with 2x returns. But more than that, they don't want to lose a Google.

Thiel: The power law distribution on revenues says that one source of revenue will dominate everything else. Y-Combinator companies are also very power law.

The thing with incubators is that they can be tricky. All these people start in similar boats, but because of the power law dynamic, end up in very different ships.

One thing people struggle with is the notion that these massive companies can be built very quickly, often seemingly overnight.

If you're doing something where you don't need to move as quickly as possible, then rethink venture funding. If there's a winner-take-all dynamic, you want VC. Giving up 25% of your business is worth it if it enables you to take over your industry.

CS 183: Startup -- Class 8 Notes Essay -- The Pitch
===================================================

Conceptually, pitching sounds easy. But it's not that easy. What you essentially have to do is to convince a smart person to exchange his capital for your piece of paper (a stock certificate) that is nothing more than a promise about something that may be valuable later, but statistically, won't be.

This is difficult because humans are massively cognitively biased in favour of long-term thinking. You must address both sides of their brains; you have to convince VCs that your proposal is economically rational, and then you must exploit their reptilian brains by persuading their emotional selves into doing the deal and overcoming their cognitive biases.

	⁃	You should also offer VCs entertainment. They see several pitches a day and that gets boring. Be funny and help your cause.

Before you pitch you should have a clear goal in mind. The vulgar answer is that you're looking for money. Lots of monety, at the highest possible valuation, wired to you as quickly as possible. 

You have to psychoanalyse your prospective VCs. Try to understand things from their perspective and present accordingly.

Like all people, VCs are different people at different times of the day. It helps to pitch as early as possible in the day.

Don't be blinded by entrepreneurial optimism. The default thinking: you created something wonderful, VCs like to invest in wonderful things, and therefore VCs will be desperate to invest in your wonderful thing. That's wrong.

Tactically, you should find someone who can actually make investments. Junior people will give you a fair shake, because they need good deeds to your name.

You should always try to pitch when you don't need money. That is when you are strongest. If you are the CEO, pitching is your job. In fact, fully half of your job is selling the company because the CEO is the only one who can actually pitch effectively. You are a salesman as long as you are CEO.

Elevator Pitch
--------------

Don't do the "X meets Y". SpaceX: "Launch costs haven't come down in decades. We slash them by 90%. The market is $XXbn."

An alternative: the pre-pitch. Done properly, this can be very effective. It's basically PR. TechCrunch has to run 20 stories a day. Let one of them be about you.

To avoid this fate, tell a story–and try to do it first without relying on your deck. People like stories; our brains are wired to respond to them. We recall facts better when they are embedded in narrative.

Aristotle:
	⁃	Logos: Argument based on facts and reason
	⁃	Ethos: Argument based on character.
	⁃	Pathos: Argumetn based on listeners' emotions.

First things first: you need a deck to explain your idea. Don't pitch without one; there will be zero VC interest without a deck, so you need to make one.

Help the junior analyst with a brilliant deck. Good, info-rich decks reduce the load on analyse. Make their work easier for them and they will do more of it.

Your chance is to have a killer deck, and then to leave it behind as soon as possible. VCs will have looked at your deck already, you want to have a real conversation as soon as possible.

Underline key phrases, because professors never fully read exams or bluebooks. If you underline those concepts on the paper, the professor sees them. If you've made grading easy, you get an A.

Explain why you are a company and not just a product/feature. Give anyone on your side sufficient ammunition to defend your company to their co-workers. VCs love to poke holes in their partners' proposed investments–it's a critical part of the lemon detection process. Anticipate the holes and fill them.

Size of addressable market: how much of the market are you going to capture, and how? What's your assessment of the competition?

When they ask you why you want to work with them, this goes to the pathos element, and is crucially important.

It takes several days for them to make a decision. Then, you'll want to pick someone in the room to be your evangelist. You need a champion in the VC firm, or else your deal will die.

Once you close a deal, get a press release out. Quote the VCs. Put them on your website. Get your logo on their website.

The truth is, most VCs aren't very good at all. The bottom 80% of the industry hasn't made any money in the last 10 years. Do not pitch until you're a company. No one wants to get pitched with just an idea or product.

Predictable things that VCs want to know:
	⁃	Macro
	⁃	Are you a company or just a product/feature?
	⁃	Your vision for the company
	⁃	Your products
	⁃	What it is
	⁃	What problem it solves
	⁃	Why is it superior
	⁃	Why it is not likely to be displaced for some time
	⁃	Team
	⁃	Why should the VC trust you?
	⁃	Are you missing anyone?
	⁃	How are you recruiting/convincing the 20th employee to join?
	⁃	What's your philosophy on compensation?
	⁃	Market
	⁃	Addressable market
	⁃	How much of the market are you going to capture and how
	⁃	Competitive analysis/advantages
	⁃	Business model
	⁃	Revenue: Sales process, cx acquisition cost, profitability
	⁃	Barriers to entry/exit
	⁃	The Ask
	⁃	How much do you need
	⁃	What's your burn
	⁃	Valuation
	⁃	Funding history
	⁃	Who else are you talking to
	⁃	Why do you want to work with this VC
	⁃	What do you want from this VC besides money


CS 183: Startup -- If You Build It, Will They Come?
===================================================

Distribution is the single topic whose importance people understand least. Even if you have an incredible fantastic product, you still have to get it out to people.

How does one actually distribute a product? And… why is distribution so poorly understood? Firstly, dispel the belief that the best product always wins. Tesla was the better scientist, but Edison was the better businessman.

Basically Customer Lifetime Value > Cost per Customer Acquisition.

Sales is very important. At Oracle and at Google, the salespeople earn quite a bit more than their engineering counterparts.

We are culturally biased to think of salespeople as classically untrustworthy, and unreliable. Mark Andreesen has noted that most engineers underestimate the sales side of things because they are very truth-oriented people. The surface appearance is irrelevant. So engineers view attempts to change surface appearance of things–sales–as fundamentally dishonest.

Product sells itself, no sales effort. Does not exist.
Product needs selling, no sales effort. You have no revenue.
Product needs selling, strong sales piece. This is a sales driven company.
Product sells itself, strong sales piece. Ideal.

Analogy to engineer vs sales: experts vs politicians. Politicians: nice to others and they get everyone to like them. People who tend to be politicians because it seems easier. Politicians seem like average people, so average people simply assume they can do the same thing. Sales is not easy. While top salespeople get paid extremely well, average salespeople don't, really.

To succeed, every business has to have a powerful, effective way to distribute its product. Great distribution can give you a terminal monopoly, even if your product is undifferentiated.

Product differentiation itself doesn't get you anywhere. And not only do you have to build a scalable product, but you also have to build a scalable distribution system.

If you can get small businesses to buy your product–you may have a terminal monopoly business. Where distribution is a hard nut to crack, getting it right may be most of what you need. If you can get small businesses to buy your product, you may have a terminal monopoly business. Think Intuit.

Marketing
--------

"Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted: the trouble is I don't know which half. Is your ad campaign good, or are the people making your ad campaign just telling you that it's good? Distinguishing between fact and sales pitch is hard.

Google was the first company that enabled people to figure out whether advertising actually worked. You can check out the different metrics and actually do straightforward calculations to determine your ROI.

Zynga has excelled at building on top of Google's ad work. Zynga experienced great viral growth as its games caught on. Less known is that they spent a lot of money on targeted advertising. And then, Zynga used that revenue to buy more targeted ads.

People can only show tip of the iceberg. Distribution works best when it's hidden. Question is how big the iceberg is, and how you can leverage it. Every tech company has salespeople; if it doesn't, there is no company. If you don't see any salespeople, you are the salesperson.

Once a company is worth $30m or more, you should have a full-time person whose job it is to do nothing but travel around the world and find prospective investors for your business.

CS 183: Startup -- Class 10 Notes Essay -- After Web 2.0
========================================================

In the early 90s, people used FTP. In the late 90s, they were mostly web browsing or connecting to P2P. By 2010, over half of all Internet usage was video transmission.

What enables the Internet to feel like the Wild West for the last 20 years or so?

Consider mobile: people have been betting on mobile for years, and most of them bet too early. Everyone who tried mobile back in 99 failed.

Healthcare: EMR technology, healthcare analytics, transparency.
Education: computerising and automating learning processes.
Labor: Uber and Taskrabbit: traditional, regulated models.
Law: Computers may end up replacing legal services by humans.

Globalization: it's better to collaborate instead of compete. Technology axis: avoid competing.

Marc Andreesen: Believing in the whole idea of the Internet was contrarian back then. People saw advantages to more information, but it was much better when interactive TV came. The causes of peoples' anti-Internet bias back then was because it was unregulated, decentralised, and anonymous.

Entrepreneurs are congenitally wired to be too early. And being too early is a bigger problem for entrepreneurs than not being correct.

There are two types of people: those who experienced the 2000 crash, and those who did not. The people who did see the crash are deeply psychologically scarred. The students missed the late '90s tech scene, so they are psychologically health.

Hypothesis: Software is eating the world.

Weak form: software is eating the tech/computer industry. The value of computers is increasingly software and not hardware.

Strong form: Software is eating many other industries that have not been subject to rapid technological change. Newspapers have been the same for 500 years, and then boom.

Strongest form: Silicon Valley type software companies will end up buying everything. The kinds of companies in the valley will rule pretty much every industry. These companies have software at their very core. They know how to develop software. They know the economics of software, and they make engineering their priority. And that's why they'll win.

Spotify: writes huge checks to label. The labels appreciate that. Spotify protected itself by having rolling contracts that expire at different times so that industry players can't gang up and collectively demand rate hikes.

Retail is very promising. Buy margins are very small, and there are high costs of having stores and inventory. For entrepreneurs, timing is a huge risk, and you have to innovate at the right time.

A board should be small. Three people is the best size. The more people you have, the worse the coordination problem gets.

What's ideal is to have a founder/CEO who is a product person/ Sales operators handle the sales force. The sales force does not build the product. In poorly run software companies, sales orders produce around. The company quickly turns into a consulting company.

Mark Andreessen: Even designers are becoming great CEOS-just look at Airbnb. They've got the whole company thinking in terms of design. Design is becoming increasingly important. Apple's success doesn't come from their hardware. It comes from OS X and iOS. A lot of the talk about the beautiful hardware is just the press not getting int. The best designers are the software-intensive ones, who understand it at the deep level. It's not just about surface aesthetics.

A lot of stuff we've invested in was developed in research labs 5-10 years ago. Looking at the Stanford and MIT research labs is a great way of assessing what kinds of technologies might become products in the next couple of hers.

The CEOs of MS, Google, and Facebook were product people who built the companies. It's fair to say that the most important companies are founded and run by people who haven't been CEO before. They learn on the job. This is scary, but the payoff is much greater.

Does this person want to learn how to be a good CEO? Some people are psychologically unsuited for the job. Others want to learn how to do it, and they do well. Managing people is different than managers.

The valley is infected by the Dilbert view; everybody thinks management is a bunch of idiots, and that engineers must save the day by doing the right things on the side. That's not right; management is extremely important.

Starting a company from scratch is hard. Doing it straight out of school is even harder. You could join a small startup to see how young companies work. But there are lots of different ways to learn. It may be better to go to Facebook or Airbnb and see how things work there, because you know what you'll be learning is what works.

It's very difficult to learn about startups if you go work at Microsoft or Google. They are great companies with phenomenal people. But there are shockingly few companies started by those people.

Mark: I interned at IBM in 1991. It was extremely screwed up. You learn everything at a dysfunctional company. It was fascinating.


CS 183: Startup -- Class 11 Notes Essay -- Secrets
==================================================

Recall that, reframed in a business context, the key question is, what great company is no one starting? If there are many possible answers, it means that there are many great companies that could be created.

You can divide human goals into three groups:

	⁃	Goals that can be satisfied with minimal effort
	⁃	Goals that can be satisfied with serious effort
	⁃	Goals that are impossible to satisfy.

Kaczynski argued that people are depressed because the only things left are easy things or impossible things.

Four primary things have been driving people's disbelief in secrets. First is the pervasive incrementalism in our society. People seem to think that the right way to go about doing things is to proceed one very small step at a time. Don't try anything too hard in the classroom; just do what's asked of you a bit better than the others and you'll get an A.

Second, people are becoming more risk-averse. Thinking about the mainstream will be dangerous for you. The prospect of dedicating your life to something that no one else believes in is hard enough. It would be unbearable if you turned out to be wrong.

Third is complacency. Finally, some pull towards egalitarianism is driving us away from secrets. We find it increasingly hard to believe that some people have important insight int reality that other people do not.

In the economics context, disbelieving in secrets leads to the conclusion that markets are completely efficient. But we know that's not all true. We have experienced decades of extraordinary inefficiencies.

Many venture capitalists seem to be looking for incremental improvements—small secrets, if they're even secrets at all. Founders Fund is more interested in looking for big secrets. One way to get started thinking about big secrets is to think about majors that aren't at Stanford.

The basic challenge is to find things that are hard but are doable. You want to find a frontier, but don't simply accept others' definitions of the frontier.

The challenge in the startup context is to figure out exactly who and how many people you should share your secret with. A lot of this is timing. The right time to bring people in is rarely at the very beginning, all at once. But it's not never, either.

The fraud problems that PayPal ran into were also a big secret. Fraud was endemic in finance and banking, but no one every talked about it. They just build in loss budgets and reserves and just try to keep things quiet.

Understanding secrets is also important if you are looking to go work for an existing company. Companies are not evenly distributed.

CS 183: Startup -- Class 12 Notes Essay -- War and Piece
========================================================

How can we tilt away from destructive activity and towards things that are beneficial and productive?

It often starts as theatre. These are ways in which competition and war are motivational. It pushes people to try and improve themselves.

In the great majority of cases, people become obsessed with their competitors. Companies converge on similarity. They grind each other down through increased competition. In the 90s, this was the online pet store market. It was Pets.com vs PetStore.com vs about 100 others. All that mattered was winning. External questions that actually mattered—is this war even worth fighting?—were ignored.

Consider Square: Square was the first company to do mobile handset credit card processing right. It did the software piece and the hardware piece, and built a brand with the iconic white square device. Then there was a proliferation of copycat readers, from square, triangle, cylinder, etc. Much better to be the original card reader and stay focused on original problems, or an original company in another space entirely.

If you do have to fight a war, yo must use overwhelming force and end it quickly.

We get two theories as to why colleagues fight: Marx would say people fight internally because they disagree about what the company should do; Shakespeare says that people fight because they both want to do the same thing.

Paypal solved this problem by completely redrawing the org chart every three months. By repositioning people as appropriate, conflicts could be avoided before they were really started. People were evaluated on just one single criterion. Each person had just one thing that he or she was supposed to do, and that person's thing was different from everyone else's.

Some competition is easier and that gives you more leeway. Banks are very bad innovators, which turned out great for PayPal. In more difficult competitive scenarios, you really have to have an edge to win.

Most people are pretty bad at inventing new things. iPhones with a blue cover, triangle card readers instead of square ones. That's not invention.

Mozilla seems to have good plans. They understand the move from desktop to mobile. Quora has interesting plans about connecting people to knowledge. Dropbox probably has big plans that take it far beyond just being a hard drive in the cloud.

Even a bad plan is better than no plan at all. You should either like what you're doing, believe it's a direct plan to something else, or believe it's an indirect plan to something else.

People also underestimate how much of an edge you need. It really should be a compounding competitive edge. If your technology is a little better or you execute a little better you're screwed. Marginal improvements are rarely decisive. You should plan to be 10x better.

Another huge thing to emphasise is the importance of your network. Get to know smart people. Talk to them. Stay current on what's happening. People see things that other people don't. If you try to analyse it all yourself, you miss things. 

PayPal had a feature for feature competition with X.com that lasted an intense 8 weeks. The best way to stop or avoid the war was to merge. The hard part was deescalating things post-merger.

It's extremely difficult to unseat Silicon Valley as the best place for tech companies. Certainly not every great tech company needs to be a product of the Valley. Groupon couldn't be created here, they need 3,000 people. This is not SV's strength.

One anti-New York perspective is that the media industry plays a much bigger role there than it does here, and that induces a lot of competition because people focus on each other, and not on creating things.

You can learn a lot from companies that succeed. The network is key. Connect with smart people. It's not a go-and-read-everything strategy. Just exchange ideas with the smart people in your network.

CS 183: Startup -- You Are Not A Lottery Ticket
===================================================

The first cut at the luck vs soil questions is a bias that one can have. Some people gravitate toward explaining things as lucky. Others are inclined to find a greater degree of skill. It depends on which narrative you buy.

The famous Thomas Jefferson's line is: "I'm a great believer in luck, and I find the harder I work the more I have of it."

The existence of this class is a structural reason in support of the anti-luck bias. One useful division in thinking about luck is to separate it out into luck involving the past and luck involving the future. If you're successful, you were probably born in the right country, and you won the geographic/genetic/inheritance lotteries. It's more fruitful to focus on the future side of things, though.

Determinate optimism: Up until the 1950s, the prevailing belief about the future was one of determinate optimism. There had always been a relatively well-defined way in which people thought the future would be much better than the present.

Indeterminate optimism: The idea was that the future would get better, but not in ways that you could know. God is unknowable, but the universe is still fundamentally benevolent. It is best to just figure out incremental things to do and wait for progress to come.

Determinate pessimism: Things are determinate. There's no cause for celebration. China will get old before it gets rich. It is forever destined to be a poor version of the U.S. It can and will copy things.

The US has a savings rate of 4%. China, 40%. It is very hard to consume to capital when you are fundamentally pessimistic about the future and believe that you'll get old before you become rich.

In a determinate world ,the are lots of things that people can do. There are thus many things to invest in. You get a high investment rate.

The pessimistic quadrants are always kind of stable. This is especially true of the indeterminate pessimistic quadrantl if you think that things are going to pot and you believe you can't control them, they probably will. You'll be stuck going nowhere for a long time. Under determinate pessimism, you'll be like China—stuck methodically copying things without hope for a radically better future.

Calculus is used if things are determinate, and statistics if things are indeterminate. In a future of definite optimism, you get underwater cities and cities in space. In a world of indefinite optimism, you get finance. The stock market is fundamentally random. It's all Brownian motion. It's all optimistic though, finance doesn't work if you're pessimistic. You have to assume you're going to make money.

If you think the future is indeterminate, the most important people are statisticians. There has been a massive upward trend on polling, and we think that they are authoritative. 

None of us knows precisely how long we're going to live. But we often consult actuarial tables that chart our probability of dying in a give year. People at 100 years old have a 50% chance of dying that year. Only one person in 10,000 makes it to age 100. Only one in 10 million lives to be 110 years.

This is why life extension gets bad wrap. People assume that probabilities dominate, and that trying to find a way around them is perceived as strange or even crazy.

Finance, perhaps more than anything else, encapsulates indeterminate thinking. Apple is the absolute antithesis of finance. It does deliberate design on every level. There is the obvious product design piece. Things are methodically rolled out.

On the heels of Apple has come the theme of well-designed products being really important. Airbnb, Pinterest, Dropbox, and path all have a very anti-statistical feel. There seems to be a link between these products and what people want. The link—great design—seems to work better and faster than Darwinistic A/B testing or iteratively searching through an incredibly large search space.

Companies with really good plans do not sell. PayPal had and executed many good ideas. But by 2002, it had run out of them, so there was a logic to selling the company.

When companies have definite plans, those plans tend to anchor decisions not to sell. There is no reason to stop when yo ucan do so much more.

Our society has been indeterminately optimistic for the last quarter century. But that quadrant is fraying at edges. Computer science is our best hope to shift to definite optimism. CS is about as deterministic as you get.


CS 183: Startup -- Seeing Green
===============================

How should you think about energy as a sector? In the clean tech context, planned indeterminacy doesn't real work. You can't just plan to go and get a new job every 2 years and call it a plan. Plans can't just be a portfolio you throw together. For a portfolio approach to work, it must have a specific granularity to it.

In practice, people don't usually target specific options that will unfold. They just figure that they will have plenty of options, and that they'll figure everything out later. But having a detailed plan is key.

The quadrants shake out like this:

	⁃	Determinate, optimistic: One specific type of energy is best, it needs to be developed
	⁃	Determinate, pessimistic: no technology or energy source is considerably better, ration and conserve it
	⁃	Indeterminate, optimistic: there are better and cheaper energy sources, but we don't know what they are so we just do a portfolio of things
	⁃	Indeterminate, pessimistic: we don't know what the right energy sources are, but they're likely going to be worse

The deterministic optimistic quadrant makes the most sense, but is the least talked about. In the 50s and 60s, it was for nuclear. Right now, there's none.

China: deterministic pessimism. Buy all the oil and gas you can have.

Most major conflicts in the last 2000 years have involved energy in some important way. Oil trade and embargoes contributed to the tensions that sparked WWII's hostilities.

List of mistakes in Cleantech

	⁃	Markets
	⁃	Mimesis and competition
	⁃	Secrets
	⁃	Incrementalism
	⁃	Durability
	⁃	Teams
	⁃	Distribution
	⁃	Timing
	⁃	Financing
	⁃	Luck

Global clean tech production is 420 GW. At 15,000 GW of global power, you're just a dot in the ocean. So you could shrink your market to give the impression that they could easily dominate it.

If you want to start a company, you should have some important secret. The secret doesn't need to be that big if you're doing a classic Internet company since those generally take less time to build and you can scale them pretty quickly.

Durability: there are many different solar cell technologies. To build a great solar startup, you have to be better than all the executions of all these competing technologies. Your goal in a startup should be to dominate and own your market for 20-30 years.

Most clean tech companies in the last decade have had shockingly non-technical teams and cultures. When dealing with something incremental and of questionable durability, you actually have to be a really good salesman to convince people that it's dramatically better.

Many startups run into problems because they discount the importance of distribution—companies literally couldn't distribute the power they would generate. Even if you build a huge solar farm in SoCal, how do you build power lines to get the energy to L.A.?

The Internet has been clean tech's closest cousin over the last decade. eBay: a recycling company. Amazon: getting rid of suburban sprawl. Airbnb: curbing excess and unnecessary hotel construction costs.

CS 183: Startup -- Class 15 Notes Essay -- Back to the Future
=============================================================

Sometimes, the best way to think about the future is to think about the way the future used to be. Going back to future can be fun. But the catch is that simply reminiscing doesn't do us any good. We have to remember that the future of the past didn't work. The goal, then, is to tap into the past, learn all we can, and deploy that knowledge in some new, important way.

The main problem with energy is that production costs are quite variable.

People have been interested in predicting the weather for a very long time. It's sort of amazing that we are still really bad at it. There is a sense that people are quitting, and there's also the question of whether you can control the weather.

In the 50s, people had all kinds of ideas about how robots would improve things in the future. A common vision was the household butler/maid/cook/driver model, where the robot would raise standards of living by doing all these chores for free. It's quite expensive to build humanoid bots. And abilities are pretty limited.

Robotex: Affordable and useful robots. Humans have to do lots of dangerous things. SWAT teams, hazardous materials experts, and bomb squad people all have very dangerous jobs. Instead of sending people in, you can send in a robot to see what's going on and maybe even take care of the situation.

Space has always been the iconic vision of the future, but a lot has gone wrong over the past couple of decades. Costs escalated rapidly. The key insight why launch costs hadn't decreased was that people had incentives to inflate costs. SpaceX is focused on getting the cost structure right and to drive launch costs down, and revisiting basic designs and revitalising them with new technology and new materials.

Peter: Radical uniqueness can be a very good thing in business. But does it make it hard to recruit people?

Scott Nolan (SpaceX): Young engineers crave responsibility. You see a startup like SpaceX and think, wow, I can surround myself with 30-50 amazing people and I'll get all this responsibility. I can actually change something. So it's easy for SpaceX to get young engineers who are more startup kind of people.

Danielle Fong (LightSail): We haven't had too much trouble recruiting at LightSail. There are many talented engineers in Silicon Valley who are doing electronics and hardware. All the members of our founding team joined up pretty easily. Many of our best people actually come from the auto racing industry. These are startup-compatible people: they understand hard work, small teams, and deadlines. But ultimately, we had some success by asking these amazingly talented people whether they really wanted to spend the rest of their lives making cars go around in a circle.

Greg Smirin (Weather): We frame it rather provocatively: solving weather prediction is more important than helping middle-aged women send virtual pigs to each other. Gaming is a really cool industry, but a lot of people aren't satisfied by building games, and want to do something bigger.

Jon Hollander (RoboteX): Many people make the mistake of trying to build really advanced stuff right off the bat. But far more important is to start with basic machines that can deal with the laws of physics. A robot that can't climb stairs or move across terrain is useless, no matter how advanced its computers or cooling systems.

Once we had our first prototype, it wasn't very difficult to get engineers. Robotics is pretty sexy. Our pitch is compelling: We build robots to save lives. We're not interested in building humanoid C-3PO. We build effective low-cost robots for police departments, power plants—anybody with sort of dangerous or tactical needs.

Peter Thiel: What went wrong in the past, and why do you think you can solve those problems now?

Danielle: It turns out that the idea of using air as a medium for energy storage has been around for a very long time. But the technology was completely abandoned. All we can dig up is that there were "problems." It's possible they didn't have the right materials, or corrosion problems. 

Greg: People have been thinking about predicting the weather for a long time. But people then didn't have the computational power or the data to calculate very well. There was imperfect information on one side or the other. Today, we have that computational power and that data. We've got a thousand CPUs spinning, crunching data from remote sensors that are measuring things very granularly at various points across a given plot of land.

Jon: People see humanoid bots on the silver screen and then go try to build robots with legs. Tracks are much better. Low-cost robots would be ubiquitous, like laptops. But very few companies can build them. To keep costs down, RoboteX leverages the computer industry. There is a huge, efficient Asian infrastructure that has been developed to build computer components, and we power our bots using off-the-shelf computer components.

Scott: Since launch costs hadn't been decreasing before SpaceX, it was clear that the rocket industry wasn't really progressing. SpaceX could succeed because it radically restructured the development process. There was a lot of friction in the design process, and the incentives were to keep costs high. SpaceX disrupted the industry through clean sheet design, in-house vertical integration and a Silicon Valley culture.

Question: How do you solve the distribution problem when you have to sell to the government or very large enterprises?

Jon: You can either approach the military, or you can target institutions like local police departments, and grow bottom-up. By selling to smaller agencies, we maintain a sense of freedom, get feedback from enthusiastic users, and we can build up a nice revenue stream.

Peter: The larger the cost of the product, the slower the process. Theoretically it makes sense for a large nuclear power plant to deploy robots. RoboteX bots would have been useful during Fukushima. But you generally can't just go and sell to the theoretical ideal customer. The person writing the $100 million check will ask who else has bought the product. If the answer is no one, they might as well stop writing the check, since that means there is probably something wrong with it.

Very successful enterprise startups have iterative sales models. They achieve a 50-100% growth each year for several years. They might make $5M in the first year, and they will double every year for a decade.

So the strategy should be to get the smallest customer that is also a good reference customer. Move quickly and acquire good references. RoboteX sells a robot to a local police department. The sale itself may not be huge, but the company can leverage any success in that narrow deployment. 

Danielle: The only exception is when someone is desperate for something that you can provide. People who are in a pinch when other suppliers fail or flake out on them are often excellent customers.

Greg: Most sales models fail because people miscalculate the sales cycle They underestimate just how long it takes to land the ideal clients. So a good recipe for success is to get the smallest, best customers you can, quickly. Jump the easy hurdles first, and then you'll know how to deal with the enterprise customers.

Scott: SpaceX would approach a customer and ask: do you want to launch your satellite in 4 years? Or do you want to launch at dramatically less cost and fly next year?

Question: How do you think about long-term exit, acquired or going public?

Peter: Remember that sales works best when it's disguised. Even uncompelling companies with terrible ideas would not say they are planning to sell. If you want to sell, the best thing to do would be to act like you don't. The VC version: If you want advice, ask for money. If you want money, ask for advice.

Mergers and acquisitions are done for two reasons: first is to grind out inefficiencies—banks just buy smaller banks to create larger, more efficient banks. In tech, M&A is about product synergy. It makes sense to merge when there is deep complementarity between two companies. In practice, such synergy rarely exists.

Question: Can you comment on the fundraising process for hardcore tech companies?

Scott: Elon had to put $100M of his own money into SpaceX. The founders of these companies are ready to go all in all the way.

Peter: NASA more or less required SpaceX to take outside funding back in 2008. Various VC firms in SV expressed concern about this, even after the company had built rockets and attempted some launches.

Danielle: People like to act like they are being disruptive, but usually it's just an act. You have to find people who have opinions that dovetail with your mission.

Peter: It is very hard for investors to invest in things that are unique. The psychological struggle is hard to overstate. If a VC wants to invest in a rocket company, the question becomes: "What on earth do you know about rockets?" The answer is probably "nothing", because no one has invested in rockets in over 40 years.

CS 183: Startup -- Class Sixteen -- Decoding Ourselves
======================================================

How much can people actually live? Even without the biotech revolution, life expectancy has been rising impressively. The rate has been something like 2.5% per decade.

Since 1840, expected lifespans were going up at a rate of 2.3 to 2.5 years with each passing decade. Before 1840, life expectancy was pretty flat for thousands of years. Only recently has it really picked up. Whether this is a short burst that will stagnate or just the beginning of a fierce acceleration remains to be seen.

CS 183: Startup -- Class Seventeen -- Deep Thought
==================================================

We think of people as being very diverse when it comes to intelligence, but we view computers as very alike, with the same black box. To think about the range of possible artificial intelligences would be to reverse this standard framework and think that there are multiple intelligences for computers.

We tend to think of AI as being marginally smarter than Einstein, but it is not a priori clear why the scale can't actually go up much, much higher than that. The bias is toward conceiving things that are fathomable.

The Turing test is the classic, decades-old test for AI that asks whether you can build a machine that behaves as intelligently as a human does. It focuses on the subset of human behaviour that is intelligent. 

The history of technology is largely a history of technology displacing people. Two paradigms: Luddite, which is that machines are bad and you should destroy them before they destroy you, and the Ricardo, which holds that technology is fundamentally good.

If the AI is just marginally better, then they could compliment humans. If it would be 30000 times better, then there would be no incentive for it to trade with us.

Question: Why is now the right time to be doing strong AI?

Eric: We have tons more data than we've ever had before. Second, AWS means that you no longer need to build your own server farms to chew through terabytes of data.

Scott: In 14 years the world's fastest computer will do more operations per second than the number of neurons in the brains of all living people. So perhaps people should spend the next 13 years figuring out what algorithms to run.

Question: Since AI is different from web or mobile apps, how do you go about recruiting?

Scott: We ask people what they care about. Most people want to make an impact. Then, if they're pretty interested, we ask them how they conceive of strong AI.

Question: What's the strategy to avoid competition?

Scott: Network effects could offer a serious advantage. If you're the first and the best, you can become the AWS of image recognition. You create an entrenching feedback loop: everyone will be on your system, and the system will improve because everyone's on it.

Eric: While AWS has competitors, they're mostly noise, and AWS has been able to out-innovate them at every step.

Question: How dangerous is this technology>

Eric: We do know that computational complexity bounds what AI can do. That intelligence wouldn't care about human welfare, so it's potentially malevolent. Being Bayesian is in some sense the right way to reason in uncertainty.

Scott: An AI may be able to make accurate predictions but not judge whether things are good or bad. It could just be an oracle that can reason about facts. People seem to conflate having intelligence without having volition. Intelligence without volition is just information.

Question: Do we actually know enough about the brain to emulate it?

Eric: We know about how people solve problems. Humans are very good at intuiting patterns from small amounts of data. But we don't know much about the nuts and bolts of neural systems.

You should always be able to explain why now is the right time to do whatever it is you're doing. Technology is worthless without good timing and vice versa.

CS 183: Startup -- Founder as Victim, Founder as God
====================================================

Traits of the Founder
---------------------

PayPal's founding team was six people. Four of them were born outside of the US. Five of them were 23 or younger.

Founders are of the inverse distribution. Which means they're either nerdish/disagreeable/outsider or strong/charismatic/insider. Why?

	⁃	It is natural. Founders really are different.
	⁃	It is developed, or nurtured. Cultural feedback makes founders different.
	⁃	It is self-created.
	⁃	It is other-created (exaggerated by everyone else).

People start out being different. They are nurtured to develop their already extreme traits. Those traits become more important, and they learn to exaggerate them.

Richard Branson: Hairstyle is probably something he died, stories about heroic founder figures get told in very exaggerated forms.

Jack Dorsey: At the outset, he had a nose ring and unkempt hair. Now he wears Prada suits and fashionable suits.

Sean Parker: Very paranoid, manages to stand out even in a group of stand-offish people.

Startups are like monarchies because that structure works better for startups. It is more tyrant than mob because it should be. Monarchy involves going from 0 to 1. Democracy involves going from 1 to 99.

Tbe dual founder thing is worth mentioning. Co-founders seem to get in a lot less trouble than more unbalanced single founders. Think HP, Moore and Noyce, and Page and Brin.

The usual narrative is that society should be organised to cater and reward the people who play by the rules. Things should be as easy as possible for them. But perhaps we should focus more on the people who don't play by the rules. 

CS 183: Startup -- Stagnation or Singularity?
=============================================

They thought that the next big thing in coding would be bio, not computers. Great hackers go into biotech. Genetics is moving faster than Moore's Law. The biggest complaint right now is that in twelve years not much has happened in terms of new treatments or cures based on the technology. This criticism is weak because for most of those 12 years genomic sequencing was so expensive that very few scientists could do the work they wanted to do using genomes. In the short run, the shift to online education seems like it will dramatically change how people learn.

Peter: Why do most people think you're crazy?

Michael Vassar: For whatever reason, having opinions about the future is seen as strange. Diverging from people means that there are fewer people you can talk to. But this is not to say that people just have different beliefs than we do. You don't encounter anti-singularity views. But most people aren't substantively engaging. What's perceived as crazy isn't the substance of the belief itself, but rather having the belief in the first place.

Aubrey de Grey: I disagree: eople do tend to have some view of the future, but they usually project relative stagnation. People tend to believe that, not only will most things not change, but what will change won't change very quickly. People who criticise my views on biotech and ageing do not identify bad logical steps or seize on anything substantive. Rather, they choose not to believe what I'm saying because it conflicts with their bias toward stagnation. They walk away sure that the rate of progress in anti-aging and longevity technology will never accelerate.

If you were to ask someone in 1900 how long it would take to cross the Atlantic in 1950, they would make a prediction drawng from ocean liner speed trajectories up to that point. The wouldn't be able to foresee the airplane. Everyone knows what the Internet did in recent years, but there is a huge reluctance to apply any of these as precedent for what or is likely to happen in the future.

Fear of the unknown is such a deal-seated emotion. When people encounter a radical new proposition, they are biased to thinks that things will go way wrong.

Sonia Arrison: First, they don't understand it. Second, they don't believe it. Third, they fear it. Think about the firefly/oak tree street lamps for a second. Just the idea of that terrifies some people. Some people respond with knee-jerk reactions: "Don't mess with nature!" "Don't play God!" The reaction is understandable, but it's not the best reaction. In a lot of ways it doesn't really make sense.

Peter: The best approach is to ignore those people, then?

Sonia: Better than ignoring them is trying to educate them. Technology that people do not understand looks a lot like magic sometimes, and magic is scary.

Peter: The assumption in Kurzweil's The Singularity is Near is that there will always be enough people who try things, so you, as individual, don't actually have to do anything and you can just wait for things to happen. Is there anything wrong there?

Aubrey: Very close to 150K people die everyday. About 100K of those daily deaths are aging-related. So each day you don't delay saves 100K lives. We want the defeat of ageing by medicine as soon as possible, for the simple reason that more suffering is alleviated the sooner we achieve it.

Sonia: Focusing on inevitability alone is dangerous because it allows people to get complacent about bad systems in place.

Peter: So who do you think is going to do this? Who is going to forge the technological future?

Aubrey: My answer is Oprah. Yes, there are a few people like Peter. There are very few visionaries who can make a difference at the formative earl stage. But there are also many people with Peter's net worth who aren't doing this. It's not that these people don't understand the issues or the value of technology. They understand these things very well. But they are held back by social opinion. Many potential visionaries are held back by little more than the social pressure to conform.

This is why mainstream opinion formers are absolutely pivotal. Perhaps no other subset of people could do more to further radical technology. By overpowering public reluctance and influencing the discourse, these people can enable everyone else to build the technology.

Michael: I do not think that progress will come from the top-down or from the bottom-up, really. It's the middle that makes change—tribes like the Quakers, the Founding Fathers, or the Royal Society. These groups were dozens or small hundreds in size. It's almost never lone geniuses working solo. And it's almost never defense departments or big institutions.

Aubrey: Michael is right that single people don't make the difference. There is too much infrastructure. Working in biology costs a fair bit of money. Developing algorithms can be quite costly, too. Individuals have to fit themselves into the network of money flow, whether that network is entrepreneurial, philanthropic, or public funding.

Sonia: Progress can come, and almost always does come, from lots of places, Things are interconnected. Ideas build on top of each other.

Closing Thoughts
----------------

By their nature, singular events are hard to teach or generalise about. But the big secret is that there are many secrets left to uncover. There are still many large white spaces on the map of human knowledge. You can go discover them. So do it. Get out there and fill in the blank spaces. Every single moment is a possibility to go to these new places and explore them.
