## ECorner: White Space is Everywhere
[link](http://ecorner.stanford.edu/authorMaterialInfo.html?mid=3067)

I guess I should mention, when Tom was on my board, the first thing he did, what we first started talking about it is like 'well are you guys, I'm trying to figure out, are you guys assholes or not? Because life's too short to work with assholes.'

So one of my favorite authors is a guy named Kurt Vonnegut, and he gave many talks during his career, they were all named How To Get a Job Like Mine, where he would give - he would say, this is the talk I'm going to give and he would get up and talk about whatever he wanted to talk about. He never talked about how to get a job like his. One time he said people should use fewer semicolons but that's about all he did in terms of that. But I liked it, because Kurt was interesting, he built a career that didn't look like anybody else's career. And in a funny way, like a lot of the things that Kurt Vonnegut wrote, it sounded humorous and absurd on the surface but there was real truth to it, because I think - my point of view is that what he was really saying is like the way to get a job like mine is like well, I'm just me. Be who you are and try to figure that out and then don't try to be anybody else and don't try to get anybody else's job. Just be the guy you are. And so that's why I wanted to call it like that.

So the TLDR there's three rules that I live. *Here's the first thing: make things, and a lot of them. And you make things as long as you can; be a maker.* And the people that I interact with, the people that I like being with now are the people who really can see things and be product people and can make things themselves.

What Tom Kosnik said when I was just coming out of Stanford in 1995, is he said 'you need to figure out the people who you want to be on your team.' You need to look around, at the 22 year olds, 23 year olds and 24 year olds who are coming out of Stanford and are in Silicon Valley now, and figure out the ones you want to work with, and play with, and collaborate with. Because 20 years from now you're going to be running Silicon Valley.

Figure out who's on your side, figure out who's not on your side and be super clear about it and invest in the people who are in your tribe always. Like don't - it's not a static thing, so keep renewing and keep bringing people in, but really, really invest in it. And so I think I can't say this super strong enough, but like the people who you work with are just about everything. I'll focus on recruiting and collaboration through my whole talk and what you'll see is that I'll weave some of the same people in. It's everything I think.

And then the third thing is - something that Tom said is do what makes your soul sing. And what he meant is that do stuff that speaks to you. So changing the world is hard. Mostly people don't want change. Mostly the status quo is a status quo because people are kind of comfortable with it, and it's easier to keep it the way it is than to change it. Being an entrepreneur is super hard, nobody wants Uber except for Uber at the beginning, right. Nobody wants to communicate in 140 character soundbytes except for Ev and Biz when they started it. And so you have to make the world the way it is, there are vested interests that want to keep the world how it was. And so, because it's hard and because it's constantly hard and because people are telling you you're a moron and why things won't work over and over again, it's important to do things that really speak to you and feed your soul and help you grow over time. And I think we forget about growth lot of times, I think we now say, 'well you're 20 or 22 and you dropped out of school and you should be able to run a multi-billion dollar company.'

And I think - I say that kind of tongue-in-cheek but I submit to you that many people believe it. But I think we forget that growth is human and growth is key. And so finding things that make your soul sing, that speak to you and you love and that grow you as a person over time is the thing. Those are my rules, that's it. Everything else is a detail.

*Tom mentioned this, but the best decision I probably ever made, the best work decision I have ever made was to be a section leader in Stanford.* And the reason - well I was at a d.school class this morning and one of the quotes that they made is that the job of a leader is to create other leaders. And it turns out that in practice you can see this network blossoming everywhere in Silicon Valley. Marrisa Mayer from Yahoo! was a section leader, Bret Taylor the former CTO of Facebook, Mike Schroepfer, the VP Engineer of Facebook, all these people are section leaders and sort of the lineages are extremely impressive. When I think it all goes back to thinking about how to create other leaders and how to teach other teachers. So that was the best work decision I ever made bar none.

Sean one of Terry Winograd's very first grad students in design at the time when we were just trying to figure out what the difference design was and human factors and usability. And obviously I just really wasn't interested in HCI and then I read this piece by a guy Mitch Kapor. And Mitch is the founder of Lotus, he started - he was one of the first people that really successfully commercialized a spreadsheet. And he wrote this piece called A Software Design Manifesto. And what he said is that software needs architects just like buildings need architects.

I think it's obvious now, but it wasn't obvious in 1991. It's interesting because I was just reading it today, and what he said in 1991 is that the revolution hasn't succeeded, because what started is this very human counterculture thing to give PCs to people. That was a revolutionary idea in the 80s. Now computers are defining us instead of us defining computers.' And when I read this bold thing, he could have written this today and he could have written about mobile instead of computers and phones instead of computers. *And what he could have said is the revolution hasn't yet succeeded, because in spite of the amazing progress and the amazing work that we're doing with these things, we're still not fundamentally human in our interactions with technology.* And again that's a threat that's led all the way through my career and I think that we're finally waking up to. I think that Steve coming back to Apple finally woke up the world about how important design, how important the human factor is. More importantly how the important thinking about technology in context could be and how powerful it could be.

I joined a company called Trilogy Software out of Stanford, and as a VC there's a funny thing that happens, which is if you come pitch me like - I believe there is a high likelihood that I can tell you where your first job was, if it was at Google, or Apple or Amazon. And it's because the first place you go out of school tends to imprint you. And so Google, they tend to have a very, very sort of let's A/B test kind of attitude. Apple tends to have a very, very slow design point of view. Zynga was like Google A/B testing but like times ten. And you tend to really, really take the lessons of the first place you work through your whole career. Trilogy, the key was recruiting, all they cared about was getting awesome, awesome people and Trilogy wasn't a successful company. But thank god I went there because recruiting is so central and so core whether you're a startup or a growing company now and that's been another lesson too.

I think that picking your first company and even whether you choose to start up or not is a key, key decision. And Joe Kraus the founder of Excite and a friend - he's a partner at Google Ventures now - he likes to say 'you learn more from successful companies than you do from failures.' In going off and doing your own thing that fails, you learn a lot, but you don't always learn the right things. *But I think seeing good examples of the right kind of scaling and the right kind of organization building is huge.* So then I went to Apple where I had been as an intern, I learned how to play with technology and I was in a part of Apple that we were looking at education and we were looking at playfulness, we were looking at children.

I know none of you remember this, but it looked like Apple was dead. And Steve came back, because Apple acquired NeXT and then he took over and nobody believed in it. And I remember this town hall in a room for ATG, the Advanced Technology Group and we were about this size and Steve was up on stage. And in the press the day before, the press asked Michael Dell who started Dell computer, what Apple should do. He was like 'well shit, I think they should give the money back to the shareholders and shut the thing down.' So, obviously it's got some poignancy now given the things that Dell's going through and how Apple has done since then. So Steve gave this big talk on how he was going to reinvent Apple. And somebody asked him 'like, what do you think about what Michael Dell said?' And then Steve paused, and he was like 'well fuck Michael Dell.' You know. No joke. He said 'fuck that guy.' And so he said 'you know what we are going to do, we're going to reinvent the company.' Yeah I'm sorry I know it's broadcast out and - you know, I am who I am.

Anyway, so Steve said 'you know what, we're going to build a great company. We're going to reinvent the world. And anybody who believes me, like let's get moving. If you don't believe that will happen then get the hell out.' And this was an amazing act of leadership because it was so clear who was in and who was out. And I'll tell you, people in the room would have followed Steve everywhere and anywhere, just about anywhere. Now it turns out me and my friends left and we're happy with that decision although economically it probably would have been better to stick around. We've all done okay. But what an act of leadership by a guy who nobody believed in at the time, nobody believed it.

Because you're going to be with these people for years, they're going to affect the way you think, you're going to affect they way they think, you're going to have uptime, downtimes, you're going to yell at each other, you're going to go through happy times. And like it's really, really careful. It's as important how to choose your investors as it is how to choose your management team. Except you can fire your management team, you can't fire your investors.

And I say that because we weren't trying to be them, we weren't going to trade shows, we weren't doing deals with Dell, we were not doing any of that shit. What we were doing is we were trying to find the biggest community we could and make them all owners. Make as many people responsible for translation and code and distribution and user interface as we could. And I showed this picture, this is a picture of the internet a while ago; it was smaller then. And what the Internet especially is called, it's a system called chaordic systems. And chaordic systems are sort of half chaos and half order but they're roughly, they're kind of multi-nodal systems where you have multi-nodal authority and no center of gravity. And so that's what the Internet is and that's what Mozilla is in many ways. So we had people who were responsible, and we really give them responsibility, whether they worked for us or not. And it was just we competed asymmetrically. We were an open source, Microsoft didn't understand what to do with that. How can you compete if you give your source code away? We were community driven, we were a non-profit. Now it turns out that Mozilla makes many hundreds of millions of dollars a year now and we profit a significant portion of that. So non-profit is more of a mission statement than it is a balance sheet statement. We were a pretty successful non profit and I am sort of obsessed with non-profit sustainability which is why I'm involved in Code for America and some other non-profits now. We didn't try to be them, I think that's true too.

Google doesn't run like Apple in the slightest, but they're both interesting, meaningful companies. I think the most interesting companies don't do that; the most interesting companies think about well who are we, and how are we successful in that context, and what do we need to add to be different than who we are now? And then ultimately we involve millions. Millions and millions of nodes and millions of people and we try to help have everybody, like a political movement, feel like we needed them to be successful. And I think - that's the key I think to a lot of community projects, which is you have to be successful enough that people can see promise, but fragile enough that they think that you need their help.

And that sounds ridiculous but I think that's the key; nobody wants to go join a thing where they don't need you. And so you need to have a project that has promise but still needs you, I think that's central. So Mozilla was a pretty happy accident for me.

And so we are able to help, we all love product. We all have the sense to leave things alone when they're working and really have the entrepreneurs, the genius in the entrepreneur, blow it out. Great products, great teams. And when I say get all the way to the finish line, what I mean is, you're not looking for , you're looking for a - to make a big fundamental durable company. And then we kind of obsess about distribution; probably more than any other firm we're focused on distribution. Because whether it's enterprise software or consumer, like the key is like how do you get enough people to give a damn about your product and use it? That's a simple question and a really, brutally hard question to answer. So we care about distribution and I'll highlight that in a second. So very large, very durable companies. So since the beginning of Internet, give or take, the web, 1995 so maybe 17 years ago, how many consumer Internet companies, which is where I focus, do you suppose are on the public markets that are worth than $1 billion? So the answer is 24. So - but if you really parse this out 24 is not a very big number, 15 years, 24 companies. And so - because, like look - I'll show you my calendar in a second - so I meet about 300 to 400 companies every year and what I'm telling you is that one and a half companies a year between 1995 and now are worth more than a billion dollars in the public markets.

 So how many of these do you think are worth more than $10 billion? Because every firm will tell you they want to invest in multi-billion dollar companies. 7. That's it.

So it's worth looking at those and understanding what's special about them and understanding what's similar and what's different. From our point of view everyone except from maybe Priceline and maybe Yahoo! you get serious network effects, serious distribution advantages as you get bigger and bigger in scale. We tend to be obsessed with things that have baked-in network advantages because it lets you get big quickly and lets you be robust for a long time. eBay, I mean eBay has gone through so many challenges. So let me give you a brief sum of reality, which is probably the most overused term that I hear. So most people say 'well our product is totally viral.' *For us, the specific and actual definition of viral is it's useful for me to get all of you on the system because that makes me want to go turn all of you into users.*

So, photo sharing is something that wasn't - photo taking on the iPhone, so when you first got your camera, photo taking wasn't viral in any way, it wasn't network effect, you'd take your picture and then it would sit on your hard drive. What Instagram did, what Kevin and Mikey did is they created a system where for me to get value I had to turn all of you guys into Instagram users. That's viral. And that's a special kind of network characteristic. Anything else is basically word of mouth, maybe network effects. But virility is a really special thing and the thing I like about this definition, which came from Reid, is it's really actionable. It really starts to get you to think. It's like 'oh, I'm using this on a single player mode. I'm thinking about this as a one person product, but now, how do I think about it if I want to use it with my wife or my dad or my cousin or my classmate?' And that's a really powerful way to unlock on the consumer Internet this idea of network and network spread.

For us and maybe a handful of others, what we look for is the Facebook style returns, the LinkedIn style returns. Big, big durable companies that are going to be fundamental and landscape-changing. It almost never happens. 24 times on the consumer Internet in the last 15 years. And there's a few more of that got bought like Instagram and YouTube but - and a few more on the sidelines like Square and some others that are looking pretty good. So here's the thing, and I really didn't understand this when I was an entrepreneur and so I'm trying to communicate it to as many people as I can. Venture capitalists, all they do all day is they try to find the best entrepreneurs as they can and they try to respond to as many entrepreneurs as they can. And they try - the best one is try to be helpful and add value. What that means is you might - a lot of VCs will see 400, 300 companies a year. And most VCs invest in 2 or 3 companies a year. So that's 1%. And as you say, 99 times you say 'no, no you're, like, not for me.' Which, as a maker, it's a hard thing to do. As a guy who see - who comes in - like, because what you're doing is, everybody's coming in and they're pitching you what the future's going to be. They can see it. It's already finished for them. The best entrepreneurs can see the future. And what you're doing is you're saying 'okay, I get this. I get that you can see the future. It's just not for me.'

Context switching is brutal. You might see a photo sharing app and - you can see a lot of photo sharing apps - but you'll see a lot of different things in the course of just one day and you'll try to be helping your portfolio of companies at the same time and you'll be trying to think of how to help your partners and everything. And a result, timing's everything. So since you're only doing one or two new companies a year, it really is key - like, you might just be busy. So we passed on Pinterest twice in 2011. The first time we did it, because we just didn't think it was going to be big, which turned out to be not true. And the second time we did it, it was just hard for us to run after it because I was in the middle of finishing up an investment in Tumblr. So Tumblr was kind of related and we couldn't really pay attention to it, and so it went by in a way that we couldn't really - I couldn't really aggressively pursue. So timing really, really is everything.

And then here's the thing that I think nobody really kind of internalizes. Like we're are all super, super quirky and super idiosyncratic, just like any other collection of humans. We all make decisions differently, we all prosecute things differently, we all think about things differently.

So I like makers. I like people who are passionate about products, who make things, who really are desperate to build things that people love. And for me that's been most fruitful, has been looking places, engineering schools, design schools and that's where I hunt more often than not. I think anybody can be a great product person as long as you have the passion and the ability to follow up in the details on product and make them great. So that was unusual.

So, here's the future. This is the whole thing, this is what I spend all my day thinking about, this is the Internet. In the past five years it's grown a lot. So almost doubled. I think many of the interesting communication apps like Lion and Cacao we're seeing come out of Asia. North America is pretty well saturated. I think and hope as a citizen of the earth that we're going to see more and more growth out of Latin America and Africa. This is pretty meaningful. So from 1987 till recently, Windows dominated. But now it doesn't. So this is 2011 and it's getting better. *So now you've got - I read something the other day that for the first time in probably 20 years more than 50% of emails were read not with Outlook.* And it's because it's on your phone. It's because it's in your tablets and phone and on your TVs. This is going to change everything. For the first time, we've got this incredibly high energy explosion; I think things are in chaos. So the question to you guys, is, there's white space. So we don't know yet whether we will go into this dark ages where one of these dominates for another 20 years. I hope not, and I kind of don't think so, because I think the amount of our lives we are mediating through mobile, through computing generally is getting higher and higher and higher.

So my view is that we're exiting in the dark ages. There's going to be a bunch of things that they grow and get big and disappear off the face of the earth. Or like the renaissance, we have lots and lots and lots of ideas and this is the time we are living in now. So the question for you guys is what will you put there? And I think this is the essence of entrepreneurship, which is like 'well I see that map. I see how it sucked before, but I'm going to draw it my way now.' That's - I'll tell you that's the most exciting chart in the whole time that I've been in and around computing.

So I'm going to do a recap. Three simple rules, make things, you make a lot of mistakes, the more you make, the more you get right. Find your tribe, choose to work with people you care about and you can live with and you want to collaborate with for a long time. And then do what makes your soul sing.

One thing that's worth mentioning is that what we did at Mozilla was attacking an incumbent market which was pretty static at that time. And that's a different thing to what say Instagram did which was on mobile and you've got greenfield and you're trying to go as fast as you can. So it's pretty important to understand the field that you're playing on. And you're right that, look back historically, what I did was mostly illustrative, say look, building a company is hard, and so - Recruiting answer probably is to the point on that. Yeah, once you get big and once you get public recruiting gets brutal. And I think that's truer now than it's been, ever.

You mention that you invest only in one out of every 100 companies that you see. So what I was thinking is that it might create some mindset in you that you might become very negative towards investments then. So do you use any tools or are there some things that you say to yourself before you get into a meeting so you don't fall into that trap of being overly negative? I'll tell you, when you say no 99 times it doesn't mean you're not interested in 99 of the meetings. So a lot - almost every meeting is interesting. Almost every meeting you can learn something from. And almost - in every meeting somebody is sacrificing much of their lives to make this future that they can see each true. So I think it's our job not to be jaded. And I think that if you get jaded too much and if you do find yourself there you sort of shake yourself and try to get better. And if you can't shake yourself then you shouldn't do investing anymore is my view. So I'm the new guy. So I'm two years into this. I'm not jaded yet.


What's the biggest reason that you turn down people? Do you look more at the - like potential in the idea or is it the potential in the person? I don't know. Look, after an hour meeting I don't know anything about you really. And that's one of the things you've got to understand, is at a VC it's like you're doing lots and lots and lots of one hour meetings and you're not doing very in-depth things. So what you're trying to figure out is people you're interested in learning more about over time. I would say there's - there are bars that you have get over in terms of market size, distribution characteristics, product quality, demonstration, the person knows how to make things. And then I think you just try to figure out whether it's the one for you or not.

Like a lot of things I turn down is just it's not - it doesn't resonate with me. I think they'll do really well but it just doesn't - it's not for me. The ones - I think it's easier to say why you like things. And when you say I'm going to invest, it's because you believe in the person and you believe in the market and you believe in the product. And when those three things come together that's the key. So it's easier to say what that positive characteristics are than the negative for me.

I decided to be VC because I thought I would be good at it, and I thought I would like it. That seems like kind of obvious, right. I thought I could like it, I thought I could be good at it. Fundamentally I've had a really good time building ventures and building management teams. Scaling Mozilla was probably the most fun thing I've ever done. I like working with great people and great entrepreneurs and it's not more complicated than that. It just felt something that I could be really good and have a really good time at it.

So I've always tried to find things that I could make the biggest difference in the world and be one of the top 5, 10, 20 people in the world at it. Well, when I was an underground I was a programmer and I realized really quickly I can never be a world class programmer. And I could find other people to be programmers, but I wanted to be a designer. So I went to be a designer. And it was really clear, really fast that I was not ever going to be a world class designer. I could be good at it but I would never be a top 20 designer in the world. But I thought I could be that for organizations. And so when I came out of Stanford I started managing a group at Trilogy and I started managing people at Apple and started my own company. And I felt that, organizationally, like I feel some competence at. And I say that kind of in a specific way because I really feel like as soon as you feel like you know things like you start to be kind of stupid. And I feel like organizations and ventures in particular, is that learning process is continual. So everything's new. So I don't know. I'm two years into this job. People tell me it takes a few years to figure out what to do, what your style is and it takes a few years after that to figure out whether your style's any good or not. I'd like to make it shorter than that, so that's why I'm trying to work on. But I don't know, I like all the jobs I have, and they're all frustrating too, you know.

Can you comment on work-life balance and your experience of working with women CEOs and how they navigate it? There are not enough women entrepreneurs, there are not enough women CEO, there are not enough women executives, there are not enough women scientists, there are not enough women in the work place generally. I think it's a brutal problem. I think that it starts very early and I think - but I think that's not the only problem. I think the expectations around families and care giving is also another problem. We're going - I have a seven year old son but also a seven month old son. And I look at my wife who's had to take a pause from the workplace because we've prioritized that work for her now. And I think it's challenging. Challenging; no way around it. So, I don't know how to answer that except that we need more, we need more people thinking about it. It is a hard problem that I don't know how to solve at a micro level other than to just keep trying.

And what I was wondering is how you go about figuring out what types of people those are for you personally? And when you do find them, how you know that they're the people that you want to be around and can build that relationship with? That's a good question I didn't anticipate. So how do you find your tribe and how do you figure out who's in and who you want to be around and if it's worth it? *And one of the - I think there - Warren Buffet's got this quote I think that's like, what you try to find in people you work with is people who have integrity, energy and intelligence, because if they don't have the first one the other two will kill you.* And so without integrity like the intelligence and energy will totally screw you up, right. And so there's some, there's some baseline things. Like you have to, you just have to figure out where your integrity line is and all that stuff and what fundamental values are important to you. Beyond that, I think you've got to try hard to put yourself in the situations that are hard. And one of the - I haven't even given this talk, but I've got a title for a talk that I want to give some time which is called On the Virtues of Getting Your Ass Kicked.

And I don't know, I think that if you are really aggressive and try to put yourself into hard situations where the people around you kick your ass all the time - so being at the table in our partnership it's a murderer's row. And I'm the new guy with five investments and we'll see how it goes. It's an intimidating table to sit at and then it's intimidating to say things. *You did the best you can and then people say 'well that's kind of the dumbest thing I've heard all day.'* But the - if it's only the dumbest thing today that's fine. Because then you'll learn and you'll get better. So that's what I would say. Just like be clear in your integrity and then put yourself in the situations that are hard, hard, hard.

