## Foreword

The earliest phase is usually the most produc- tive. That’s when they have the really big ideas. Imagine what Apple was like when 100 percent of its employees were either Steve Jobs or Steve Wozniak.

he striking thing about this phase is that it’s completely different from most people’s idea of what business is like. If you looked in people’s heads (or stock photo collections) for images representing “business,” you’d get images of people dressed up in suits, groups sitting around conference tables looking serious, PowerPoint presentations, and people producing thick reports for one another to read. Early-stage startups are the exact opposite of this. And yet they’re probably the most productive part of the whole economy.

I think there’s a general principle at work here: the less energy people expend on performance, the more they expend on appear- ances to compensate. More often than not, the energy they expend on seeming impressive makes their actual performance worse.

Business is broken the same way that car was. The effort that goes into looking productive is not merely wasted, but actually makes organizations less productive. 

Ditto for most of the other differences between startups and what passes for productivity in big companies. And yet conventional ideas of “professional- ism” have such an iron grip on our minds that even startup founders are affected by them.

In fact, programming didn’t get done by well-dressed people at clean desks during office hours. It got done by badly dressed people (I was notorious for program- ming wearing just a towel) in offices strewn with junk at 2:00 in the morning.

## Introduction

Some kind of magic happens in startups, especially at the very beginning, but the only people there to see it are the founders. The best way to understand what happens is to ask them, so that’s what I did.

What surprised me most was how unsure the founders seemed to be that they were actually onto something big. Some of these companies got started almost by accident. The world thinks of startup founders as having some kind of superhuman confidence, but a lot of them were uncertain at first about starting a company. What they weren’t uncertain about was making something good— or trying to fix something broken.

They all were determined to build things that worked. In fact, I’d say deter- mination is the single most important quality in a startup founder. If the founders I spoke with were superhuman in any way, it was in their persever- ance. That came up over and over in the interviews.

Perseverance is important because, in a startup, nothing goes according to plan. Founders live day to day with a sense of uncertainty, isolation, and some- times lack of progress. Plus, startups, by their nature, are doing new things— and when you do new things, people often reject you.

That was the second most surprising thing I learned from these interviews: how often the founders were rejected early on. By investors, journalists, estab- lished companies—they got the Heisman from everyone. People like the idea of innovation in the abstract, but when you present them with any specific inno- vation, they tend to reject it because it doesn’t fit with what they already know.

As Howard Aiken said, “Don’t worry about people stealing your ideas. If your ideas are any good, you’ll have to ram them down people’s throats.”

People think startups grow out of some brilliant initial idea like a plant from a seed. But almost all the founders I interviewed changed their ideas as they developed them. PayPal started out writing encryption software, Excite started as a database search company, and Flickr grew out of an online game.

Successful startup founders typically get rich from the process, but the ones I interviewed weren’t in it just for the money. They had a lot of pride in crafts- manship. And they wanted to change the world. That’s why most have gone on to new projects that are just as ambitious. Sure, they’re pleased to have more financial freedom, but the way they choose to use it is to keep building more things.

In its plain form, pro- ductivity looks so weird that it seems to a lot of people to be “unbusinesslike.” But if early-stage startups are unbusinesslike, then the corporate world might be more productive if it were less businesslike.

## Max Levchin Cofounder, PayPal

_PayPal went public in early 2002 and was acquired later that year by eBay for $1.5 billion. PayPal was started during the Internet Bubble, but it was in no sense a Bubble startup. Its success was a direct reflection of the intelligence of the people who built it. In large
part, PayPal succeeded because it could deal with fraud—and its competitors couldn’t.

My focus in college was security. I wanted to do crypto and stuff like that. I had already founded three different companies during college and the year after, which I spent in Champaign-Urbana, where I went to school. I went to see this random lecture at Stanford—given by a guy named Peter, who I had heard about, but never met before. The lecture turned out to have only six people in it. I called Peter and said, “This investment is a great thing, but I have no one to run the company. I’m just going to write the code and recruit the coders.” The next 2 weeks we were sort of playing with the idea, and by 1/1/99 we agreed that he would be the CEO and I would be the CTO.

This idea that I had in college, which I was vaguely successful with—if you’ve ever seen these authen- tication devices, like a little card that spits out numbers at you that you can log in with. In college one day I had bought all the different kinds of cards. They weren’t that difficult to reverse- engineer because you already know the standard, so you know it can’t be too far outside the standard.

Once I got them all reverse-engineered, I wrote an emulator for every single type of them for a Palm Pilot. I had a lot of friends on campus who were really into security as well—most of them were sys admins—and they carried a whole bunch of these things in their pockets, because most of the time you can only use one per computer, per system. 

Then finally we hit on this idea of, “Why don’t we just store money in the handheld devices?” The next iteration was this thing that would do crypto- graphically secure IOU notes.

Then we had the famous Buck’s beaming—at Buck’s restaurant in Woodside, which is sort of the home away from home for many VCs. Our first round of financing was actually transferred to us via Palm Pilot. Our VCs showed up with a $4.5 million preloaded Palm Pilot, and they beamed it to us.

The product wasn’t really finished, and about a week before the beaming at Buck’s I realized that we weren’t going to be able to do it, because the code wasn’t done. Obviously it was really simple to mock it up—to sort of go, “Beep! Money is received.” But I was so disgusted with the idea. We have this security company; how could I possibly use a mock-up for something worth $4.5 mil- lion? What if it crashes? What if it shows something? I’ll have to go and commit ritual suicide to avoid any sort of embarrassment. So instead of just getting the mock-up done and getting reasonable rest, my two coders and I coded nonstop for 5 days. I think some people slept; I know I didn’t sleep at all. It was just this insane marathon where we were like, “We have to get this thing working.”

It was one of these things where you can’t just be done. With crypto, if you are one bit off, nothing’s going to work. We started testing at midnight the night before and fixed all the bugs and tested more. There were definitely some memory leaks, but it was secure. It was one of these things where the software wasn’t perfect, but the security path where the money changed hands was defi- nitely provably secure. The danger was that the Palm Pilots might crash, but the transaction was perfectly safe. I could have bet my own life on the transac- tion. The thing that was not safe was just the software was not really perfect. It was clunky; I was worried that it might crash.

Sometime by early 2000, we realized that all these people were trying to use the website for transactions, and the growth of that was actually more impressive than the growth of the handheld device one, which was inexplicable, because the handheld device one was cool and the website was just a demo.

We tried to attack the system for ourselves, like a good security person would. How can you cheat and steal money and do whatever? We made some provisions from day one to prevent fraud. We prevented all the obvious fraud, and then, I think 6 months into it, we saw the first chargeback and were like, “Ah, one per week. OK.” Then it was like an avalanche of losses; 2000 was basi- cally the year of fraud, where we were just losing more and more and more money every month. At one point we were losing over $10 million per month in fraud. It was crazy.

ut then eventually I became interested in the economics of PayPal and trying to see what’s going on in the back end, because I was getting distracted from code and technology. I realized that we were losing a lot more money in fraud than I thought we were.

o I started freaking out over it, and this intern and I wrote all sorts of pack- ages—very statistical stuff—to analyze “How did it happen; how do we lose money?” By the end of the summer, we thought, “The world is going to end any minute now.” It was obvious that we were really losing tons of money. By mid- summer, it was already on a $10 million range per month and just very scary.

Bob and I built this package called IGOR.  So we built this tool—actually we have a patent on it now—and it was very impressive. It’s based on the assumption of all sorts of convoluted guesses on our part, but the guesses turn out to be mostly right. 

We realized that the way we were attacking these things was just funda- mentally flawed. So Bob and I built this system that was part visualization pack- age, part graph balancing tool, that would try to represent large-scale travels of money in the system in a visual form. Taking that as a base, we built all these different tools that would allow computers to predict where particularly expen- sive losses would be and then represent the networks of losses to the investiga- tors in such a way that they could very quickly make a decision whether or not to pursue a particular case.

It’s one of those things where, in the end, fraud is so nondeterministic that you need a human or a quantum computer to look at it and sort of make a final decision, because, in the end, it’s people’s money. You don’t really want some computer saying, “$2.00 for you, nothing for you.” You need a human with a brain to say, “Hmm. This looks like fraud, but I really don’t think it is.”

We never really showed IGOR to anyone. We never talked about it in the press. I was definitely very paranoid. Initially, when we built it, we had a conference room where there was the IGOR terminal, and people would go in there, use it, and leave. There were no other copies available.Q

 I didn’t really want to patent it because, for one, I don’t like software patents, and, two, if you patent it, you make it public. Even if you don’t know someone’s infringing, they will still be getting the benefit. Instead, we just chose to keep it a trade secret and not show it to anyone.
After a while, IGOR became well known to the company, like all the other tools that we had built early on. We had patented some of it, and some of it we said, “OK, it’s open for wide use now.” There’s still a whole bunch of tools that they are using today that are not public. They don’t talk about it much at all, and I think that’s a good thing.

I think a good way to describe PayPal is: a security company pretend- ing to be a financial services company. What PayPal does is judge the risk of a transaction and then occasionally actually take the risk on. You don’t really know the money’s good; you just sort of assess the riskiness of both parties, and you say, “I’ll be the intermediary with the understanding that, on occasion, PayPal will be on the hook for at least part of the loss if the loss occurs.” Which is very tricky; it’s a hard position to be in.

So the company’s core expertise, by definition, has to be in this ability to judge risk—to be able to say, “Is this the kind of transaction I really want to take on or is this something I should steer away from because you people look like thieves?” I think that’s the security part.

The really complicated part is figuring out the risk. The financial industry people understood the risk, but they weren’t willing to do the sort of stuff we did, where they would basically say, “Bad guys over here. Let’s get all the bad guys out.”

There are tools to just say, “Give me your social security number, give me your address and your mother’s maiden name, and we send you a physical piece of paper and you sign it and send it back to us.” By the time that’s all accom- plished, you are a very safe user. But by then you are also not a user, because for every step you have to take, the dropoff rate is probably 30 percent. If you take ten steps, and each time you lose one-third of the users, you’ll have no users by the time you’re done with the fourth step.

There was always something, every day. I could not sleep well for 4 years. If you are in charge of technology at a really fast-growing company that gets lots of publicity, there’s always something that worries you. In early 2000, it was scalability. We had a few days when the site was down. Even though we were adding servers and rewriting code to be more scalable, at a certain point the original design was starting to crack. It was kind of painful.

It’s one of those things where you have to fly by the seat of your pants all the time. It would be nice to test some hardware and set up a big lab: “We have x systems now; let’s 2x the systems and get twice the amount of hardware and see if it can scale.” But, it doesn’t work that way because, by the time you are done testing 2x, the real system is 3x because the growth is so fast. We were get- ting 20,000 new active users every day. The transactional growth is exponential because people are sticking around. It’s not like people came in, did one thing, and left. They came in, did one thing, and stayed. And they kept doing more.

We built the system to be viral from day one. The idea was: I can send you the money, even if you aren’t a member. If I send you $10, you get an email saying, “You have $10 waiting for you. Sign up, and you can take it.” That’s the most powerful viral driver there is. Free money available to you.

For eBay buyers and sellers, it became this crazy loop where buyers would be like, “I want to pay you with PayPal,” and sellers would be like, “I don’t accept PayPal.” And buyers would say, “That’s OK. I’ll just send you $10, and you can sign up.” So the seller would get infected, and the seller would say, “Oh, this is really simple, so I only accept PayPal.”

Try to have a good cofounder. I think it’s all about people, and, if you are doing it completely alone, it’s really hard. It’s not impossible, in particular if you are a loner and introverted type, but it’s still really hard.
One of the ways PayPal changed me is that I used to be really introverted, and I sort of still am, but not anywhere near to the extent that I used to be. But, you only can count on energy sources and support sources from yourself. There’s really no one else who you can go to and say, “Hey, this thing is going to fall apart any minute now. What the hell are we going to do?”

I have this IQ bias—anybody really smart, I will figure out a way to deal with. We would constantly try to come up with ones that the other person wouldn’t be able to solve. I’m really into puzzles. I’m not a very quick solver, so I tend to take a long time. Not always, but on occasion, I will take a lot longer than an average time to solve it, but I almost always will succeed.

There are different segments to running a startup. Different people taught me different things. A lot of the top management people at PayPal were really good. It was very fun and meaningful to work with them and pick up their various interests and skills.

It’s one of these things where, if you look back now, when everyone walked away with a ton of money, everyone loves everyone. The company’s not doing well; they’ve overpaid and they’ve been too nice. It’s half and half. I think I was blissfully spared a lot of it because Peter managed the board much more than I did.

What can big companies do to preserve a startup culture? Less PowerPoints. I think PayPal—even by the time we were acquired—still felt really startup in a variety of ways.

I think the hallmark of a really good entrepreneur is that you’re not really going to build one specific company. The goal—at least the way I think about entrepreneur- ship—is you realize one day that you can’t really work for anyone else. You have to start your own thing. It almost doesn’t matter what that thing is. We had six different business plan changes, and then the last one was PayPal.

If that one didn’t work out, if we still had the money and the people, obvi- ously we would not have given up. We would have iterated on the business model and done something else. I don’t think there was ever any clarity as to who we were until we knew it was working. By then, we’d figured out our PR pitch and told everyone what we do and who we are. 

## Sabeer Bhatia

_they came up with the idea of email accounts that could be accessed anonymously through a web browser. This idea became the startup. In 1996, the first web-based email was born, offering people free email accounts that could be accessed from any computer with an Internet connection. On New Year’s Eve, 1997, Microsoft acquired Hotmail for $400 million._

Our manager left the company to join a startup in the Valley called FirePower Systems. Jack and I knew Apple would have given us steady, stable employment, but it wasn’t with grand stock options. So we decided to leave Apple and join this startup.

We worked very hard, cranking out products: chips that were used to design PCs that ran on the PowerPC processor. But what hap- pened over time is that Intel itself caught up on the price/performance curve.

Two of my colleagues from Stanford had gone on to start Yahoo, and I thought, “Wow. This is just a list, a directory which tells you what is where. And somebody put $1 million in them.” And somebody put $1 million in them.” I mean, that was huge. So I thought, “This Internet thing is here to stay,” and I started playing around with it and came up with the idea to do a simple-to-install database at the back end. Then you’d use the browser as the front end. It could store any piece of information at the back, but the browser would be used to display it. So people could just look for it and be able to create a personal database of anything: con- tact information, phone numbers, special files, or whatever it is that you would do on a local PC.

No, we were actually both working, so we decided to spend all of the time on the weekends and evenings building this product. Then it came to a point that one of us had to quit our job to focus full-time on it, so I told Jack, “I’m single and don’t have a family. Why don’t you quit and start working on this and I’ll give you half of my salary?” So at least he could support his family. I did- n’t need that much money.

We went to a number of VCs and many of them turned us down because they were like, “How are you going to make money if you are going to give it away for free? What’s the revenue mechanism?” We said we would capture detailed demographic information about people and that detailed quality of information on individuals would help us advertise to them. But of course advertising was not a proven revenue model at that time.

 While we were putting the business plan for JavaSoft together and were working at FirePower Systems, they installed a firewall around our corpo- rate intranet that prevented us from dialing out to our personal email accounts. I had an account at Stanford and Jack had one at AOL, so we would dial out and email each other. But we couldn’t do that anymore because the firewall pre- vented us from accessing our personal accounts. So we ended up exchanging information on floppy disks and on physical pieces of paper. That’s when it occurred to us, “Wait a minute, we can access any website in the world through a web browser. If we made email available through the web browser, that would solve our problem.”

That we could access our email from only two places: our homes and our work. And while we were at work, we could not access our per- sonal email accounts. Our plan was to use the JavaSoft idea to get money from venture capitalists. But actually the killer arrow in our quiver was always email because we thought that it was even bigger than the original idea.

etscape was building email servers. What if the VCs were just to say to them, “Hey, why don’t you do web-based email?” And that’s it, that’s the idea, right? There was not that much to protect in terms of IP. Whoever built it first
would win the market.
So we were afraid and that’s why we kept that as the secret. But we were
going to do web-based email no matter what, even if we got funding for the other idea.

We actually planned to do this. You can’t get an audience with any ven- ture capitalist without sharing a business plan, but we didn’t want our business plan floating around somewhere with the email idea. So we would go in with the JavaSoft business plan. If they passed the litmus test of not rejecting us for the wrong reasons and said, “OK, we don’t mind that you’re young, we don’t mind that you don’t have management experience,” only when they would start poking holes in the actual idea would we share the Hotmail idea with them. 

They said, “We’re going to get one of our partners to come in and take a look at this because it could be big.” We finally settled on a 15 percent split with them and they valued the company at $2 million post money. But they’d put in a right of first refusal. Since I was a young entrepreneur at the time, I didn’t under- stand that this basically meant that you couldn’t go to any other VC. It impeded our ability to go to another VC. What ended up happening was that we could not get a higher valuation because DFJ wanted to put more money in the company themselves. So any time we would talk to another VC, they would talk him out of it:

they’re a good VC firm in the sense that they try to put deals together. But sometimes they don’t play by the rules.

Nobody knows this, but the round before the deal with Microsoft, they lit- erally put $5 million in the company just because they knew it was going to get sold and that we needed some bridge money. They knew full well that we were going to get acquired; we were negotiating about the final price.

We got funded on February 14, 1996, and the site launched on the Fourth of July. We had 100,000 subscribers in the first 3 months and we were growing very rapidly from then on. We were literally getting 1,000, 2,000, 5,000 sign-ups every day. It all spread by word of mouth. We launched a massive PR campaign with a PR firm and started talking to different journalists. We did a West Coast and East Coast press tour, and it just took off from there.

You had a tagline in the body of the email encouraging email recip- ients to set up their own free Hotmail accounts. How did you come up with this? It was actually Jack’s idea to do that. We ran it by our VCs just to make sure it was OK. When you alter somebody’s email, you’ve got to be very careful. You’re sending an email to a friend of yours, and we are kind of violating the sanctity of that email by putting in a tagline at the end of it that says “This mes- sage has been sent from Hotmail. Get your free email at hotmail.com.”

How did you convince people you could make money from tar- geted advertising? It was novel, but at the same time it wasn’t novel, because Yahoo had gotten funding (and later went public) on that basis. Their whole concept was to grow by advertising, even though it was a directory, because people would pay for advertising. What has happened in the last 10 years is that advertising has grown even more. It’s not just page impressions, but the number of click-throughs. The most monetizable part of advertising (at least online advertising today) is the click-through to another advertiser, which is search. When people search, they’re most likely to click through because that’s when they’re looking for something.

It takes a long time before you can break through to an advertiser and get them to start paying you. In fact, the first 3 or 4 months we were doing advertising for our advertisers for free. We had them give us their banners, just to show that this was a mechanism for people to get their product in front of millions and millions of consumers.

Ads were perceived to be kind of a negative. And that’s the reason why, when there used to be 25 search engines, only 2 or 3 have survived. The others have died because they made their front pages look like Las Vegas casinos as opposed to preserving that sim- ple, clean interface that Google has. I think the strategy that Google took was far better. They earned the trust of the end consumer.

Did Hotmail ever become profitable from advertising? No, we didn’t become profitable. But we weren’t losing that much money. We found that we were not the best at selling ads, so we outsourced the whole thing to another company and said, “You guys go sell the ads for us. We’ll just focus on delivering these ads to you no matter how much you sell them for. hat minimum commitment they gave us, which was about $1 million per month, was alone sufficient for us to break even. Our costs were so low; we were spending about $1 million a month.

efore we launched, I think the first major turning point was getting the $300,000 in funding. That was huge for us—two young kids to get that much money. The second turning point really was when I started using it and I told my friends and family about it and everybody who used the product (50 or 100 or so people) loved it. 

Was there ever a time when you thought you were in trouble? The only time was when we had to go in for the second round of financ- ing. We didn’t have any money and Tim was at the Olympics in Atlanta and he refused to fund us because we wanted a slightly higher valuation. We had only a couple of weeks worth of money left and I would not have been able to meet the next payroll. So as soon as he came back, we literally had to accept his terms and move on. 

Who were you most nervous about from a competitive standpoint? We were most nervous about compa- nies like Netscape, because Netscape was building email servers and they would provide web-based access to the servers. Their whole point was that they provided web-based management to servers that you could set up. So, as sys- tem administrators, you could check to see how many had people signed up or whatever, but they were not offering web-based mail to people.

The good news was that a lot of people said, “I’m not sure email is a browser-based product. Email is best done on an email client like Outlook Express. It doesn’t belong in the browser.” That’s what Jerry Yang said at Yahoo. We were like, “Great!”

Talks with Microsoft started after our first anniversary, which was July 1997. In August or so, Microsoft contacted us and said, “Wow, this is really big. Do you really have 7 million subscribers?” We worked out a detailed business plan about how we would provide email to their subscribers, and then they said they wanted a tighter relationship between us and their company—that they wanted to invest in our company. So they looked at our business plan and saw very quickly that we wanted to be more than just an email company. We wanted to incorporate all of the other functions as well, such as personalized news and those kinds of things. 

They called us to meet with Bill on October 13, 1997, and we were shown the Microsoft campus, headquarters, the whole works. We were taken to Bill’s office, met with him, and then we were taken to a room with a gigantic table, and there were about 15 Microsoft negotiators sitting on the other side: business development people, lawyers, accountants, all of them. They gave a presentation about how much they liked the company and this and that, and they said they wanted to buy us and placed an offer of $160 mil- lion. I said, “Thank you very much for making an offer. We really, really like your company and like the fact that you like us so much. We’ll go back to our board and discuss this and get back to you.”

What drove you to keep on negotiating until you got the $400 million? Once you’ve got a lead in terms of a subscriber base, that is unassail- able. It can’t be replicated easily. So I knew even if they started developing the product—I have no doubt in my mind that they could have developed it, so many engineers and smart people in Microsoft. At that time they had some- thing like 16,000 engineers, and I had a total of 60 people in the company, only 14 engineers, so it would have been easy to pick 15 guys from 16,000 and build this product. But I knew we had that momentum behind us and that is very hard to replicate.

Once you have tasted this kind of success, once you’ve tasted that it works, that you’ve got subscribers who are telling you it’s good, you know you are going to get there. In fact, that’s exactly what’s happened. That 6-month lead that we had already over any of our competitors today has translated into about a 50 to 100 million–user lead. Seeing how they did a lousy job of providing email to their 2.5 million sub- scribers, I also knew that they didn’t have the technology in house. Because if they did, they wouldn’t have been asking to license this from us. 

I think I knew that Hotmail was going to become successful one day. I was just shocked that all of that happened in a span of 20 months from start to finish. Those kinds of things don’t happen very often; from the time you start to the time you see an exit in less than 2 years. 

Let me tell you one other thing about the Internet: there are thousands of such ideas under our noses even as we speak. Why things happen, I just don’t know. Maybe somebody has a need and, in our case, we had a need. That’s what triggered the idea.

The one lesson that I’ve learned in my experience while I did Hotmail and since I’ve done Hotmail is you have got to own the customer. The customers came to us for free at Hotmail. Even though they were free customers, what the last 10 to 15 years of my experience of the Internet has taught me is that it’s OK if you don’t monetize them right up front. Eventually you will be able to.

The general piece of advice, which is fairly mundane and oft repeated, is: make sure you write a business plan because it will crystallize your thoughts to communicate your ideas with somebody else. Make sure that once you have written your business plan, you have somebody read and critique it and ask you questions.

Second is, don’t try to change user behavior dramatically. For example, the reason that Hotmail succeeded was because people were accus- tomed to going to different websites. All they had to do was put in their name and password and a little bit of information and they got an email account. So in that regard, it was the ease of use of getting online and having an identity.

The other reason why Hotmail became kind of like its own phenomenal PR was every time somebody sent an email out, it was sent from @hotmail.com. That’s of huge branding value, to have that moniker in people’s email IDs. So when people would give a business card to somebody that said @hotmail.com, it perpetuated the brand.

You were a programmer. How did you learn how to write a busi- ness plan? One of the natural talents that I believe I have is the ability to communicate. A business plan is nothing more than your own communication to a person not sitting in front of you—an imaginary person who will read it. Try to answer every possible question that that person could raise. That’s the description of a business plan, really.

## Steve Wozniak Cofounder, Apple Computer

_when you meet Woz in person, you realize another equally miraculous aspect of his character. A programmer might describe it by saying he’s good in hardware._

Even back in high school I knew I could design computers with half as many chips as the companies were selling them with. I taught myself, but I had taught myself in a way that forced me to learn all sorts of trickiness. Because you try to make valuable what you’re good at. I was good at making things with very few parts by using all sorts of tricks—almost the equivalent of mathematics—so I valued products that were made with very few parts.

That helped in two ways. When you are a startup or an individual on your own, you don’t have very much money, so the fewer parts you have to buy, the better. When you design with very few parts, everything is so clean and orderly you can understand it more deeply in your head, and that causes you to have fewer bugs. You live and sleep with every little detail of the product.

hen I came home from work, I kept doing electronics anyway. I didn’t do the same calculators we were doing at work, but I got involved through other people with the earliest home pinball games, hotel movies . . .I was kind of in with Atari and they recognized me for my design talents, so they wanted to hire me.

I said, “No, I’m never going to leave Hewlett-Packard. It’s my job for life. It’s the best company because it’s so good to engineers.” It really treated us like we were a community and family, and everyone cared about everyone else. Engineers—bottom-of-the-org-chart people—could come up with the ideas that would be the next hot products for the company. Everything was open to thought, discussion, and innovation. So I would never leave Hewlett-Packard. I was going to be an engineer for life there.

Then I designed a game for Atari called Breakout, and that was a really incredible product. That was just so neat, to have my name associated with a product that actually came out in the field in video games.

I just saw somebody typ- ing away on the teletype, just talking about playing chess with a computer in Boston, and I said, “I have to do this. I just have to have this for myself.” For a lot of entrepreneurs, they see something and they say, “I have to have this,” and that will start them building their own.

I couldn’t really afford to buy the pieces I needed. I couldn’t buy a teletype, so I had to design my own terminal. The only thing that was free (because I had no money) was a home TV to see characters on. I got a keyboard for $60, which was amazingly low-priced then. That was the most expensive thing to getting my terminal built. Then it was just a matter of designing logic to put dots on a TV screen that add up to the letters of the alphabet and spell out what’s coming from another computer far away. The keyboard types the data to the computer far away, and I built a modem for that. So now I had a TV terminal. This is while I’m working at Hewlett-Packard. I’m just doing these things on the side for fun in my apartment in Cupertino.

Back in college, I had designed a neat deal called a blue box, for making free phone calls. Steve Jobs came along and said, “Let’s sell it.” So now I had this video terminal, and he said, “There’s a local time-sharing outfit that buys these expensive terminals. Why don’t we sell this to them?” So we actually sold some of the video terminals that I had built. It was to become a portion of the Apple I.

I had wanted a computer my whole life. Back in high school I told my dad, “I’m going to have a computer someday.” And he said that it cost as much as a house—the down payment on a house. And I said, “Well, I’ll live in an apart- ment.” But I was going to have a computer someday. So it starts with a huge dedication. You start with a lot of motives and values and who you are going to be in life.

Now, I still was in this mode where I had to build everything for free. Then I discovered that microprocessors had come out. I had sort of slipped out of the electronics world, out of the computer world, due to working in calculators at Hewlett-Packard. All of a sudden I discovered these microprocessors. What are they? I didn’t quite understand it fully, so I took a datasheet home.

I looked at the Altair computer that started the whole thing going. It was the first microcomputer, but it wasn’t really a computer. To me, I needed one thing. In high school, I told my dad that I was going to have a 4K Data General Nova. Why 4K? 4K bytes of memory. The reason is that’s the minimum computer to run a programming language. You’ve got to be able to program in Fortran or Basic, or some language to get your programs done. The Altair that was being sold at a ridiculously low price, all it was was a glorified microproces- sor from Intel, with some chips to protect the voltages.

My thinking was always, in making something possi- ble, you’ve got to get it down to a reasonable cost, but I needed 4K bytes of RAM minimum. The first dynamic RAMs got introduced that year, 1975—the first 4K dynamic RAMs. That was the first time ever that RAMs were lower in price than magnetic core memories, which every computer up to that day had used. So all of a sudden, the world was going to change to RAMs. Silicon was going to be our memory.

My whole life was basically trying to optimize things. You don’t just save parts, but every time you save parts you save on complexity and reliability, the amount of time it takes to understand something. And how good you can build it without errors and bugs and flaws.

I had no money. I could never build one. Chips back then were . . . like I said, to buy a computer built, it was like a down payment on a good house. So, because I could never build one, all I could do was design them on paper and try to get better and better and better. I was competing with myself. But that’s just the story of how my skill got so good. It’s because I could never build anything, I just competed with myself to come up with ideas that nobody else would come up with.

I knew that I had a lot of approaches in computers that basically no human really would use. They couldn’t even be taught in a school program. I did a lot of it in my head. Taught myself everything. We didn’t have computers in our high school even. And I was designing them.

My skill was that, if I know what I want for the end result—in those days it was a computer, in later days it might be a certain floppy disk that had to read and write some data—but if I knew what my end goal was, I know how to com- bine chips together very efficiently to get that goal done. Even if I’ve never designed anything before. My skills weren’t that I knew how to design a floppy disk, I knew how to design a printer interface, I knew how to design a modem interface; it was that, when the time came and I had to get one done, I would design my own, fresh, without knowing how other people do it.

All the best things that I did at Apple came from (a) not having money, and (b) not having done it before, ever. Every single thing that we came out with that was really great, I’d never once done that thing in my life.

 We had a guy that designed the Macintosh and he was the same way. He’d never gone to college, but, boy, he just studied circuits that had been done by others and just became that good on his own.

 I didn’t learn anything about designing computers in college.  I didn’t know anything about computer lan- guages except—a friend of mine had gone to MIT and, while he was there, he would Xerox pages out of books that were good topics, and he had sent me a lot of pages back from compiler design books. So I had actually read some com- piler design books. I hadn’t taken a course, I hadn’t had a teacher, but I had some ideas of some of the parts involved in parsing a computer language.

I  knew that I wanted a good enough computer and it meant a microproces- sor (once I discovered that a microprocessor was like those minicomputers I used to design), dynamic RAM was the choice to save money and parts, and I already had the terminal. Then I sniffed the wind and I said, “I need a lan- guage. I’ve got a 4K computer. It can run a language, but there’s no language yet for this microprocessor. So I was (a) a little bit disappointed because I wanted a computer language, but (b) I was excited and exuberant because I got to be the one to write the first language for this processor. I would get a little bit of fame out of that, and I was super shy, so the only way I could ever get noticed was if I designed great things.

In my minimalist approach, I made the wires the shortest, straightest, thinnest wires possible, instead of having these big old looped-up hairy messes of wire-wrap type stuff. So I did all that and I was also the technician. 

Steve Jobs came in saying, “Let’s start a company.” He said, “Look, there are a lot of people that want to build it and they can get the chips, but they don’t want to solder it all together. So why don’t we make a PC board and they can plop their chips in the PC board”—soldering a printed circuit board is easy, there are no wires—“and then they’ve got it done.”

So the idea was that we’d start this company and build PC boards for $20 and sell them for $40. Well, I only knew the club as a place to sell it and I thought, “Are there 50 people at the club”—I had a group gathering around me—“who are going to buy this computer instead of the Intel?” I didn’t think so, but Steve said, “Even if we don’t get our money back, at least we’ll have a company.” So it was like two good friends having a company.

How did you know Steve? That computer that was like the Altair that I’d built 5 years before— Cream Soda Computer—I’d told a friend down the block, Bill Fernandez, about it, and we agreed to solder it up in his garage. We spent about 2 weeks soldering my design together. We’d ride our bikes down to buy cream soda and come back and drink it, so we called it the Cream Soda Computer. Bill went to our high school, and he said, “There’s another guy at Homestead High School, younger than you, and he’s interested in electronics and pranks and things too and you really should meet him.” So he thought we were alike.

We both had a lot of similar experiences so we had a lot to talk about. Then we became best friends for so long. There weren’t that many people that young that knew technology. Steve and I weren’t similar personalities, which was strange, but I’m the sort of person that goes along with anyone that wants to talk technology.

The very first thought in my mind was, “I think I signed a document that everything I design belongs to Hewlett-Packard.” Even just on my own time, I thought that they deserved it first. And I wanted Hewlett-Packard to build this. I loved my division. I was going to work there for life. It was the cal- culator division; it was the right division to move into this kind of a computer.

When Steve called me one day at work and he said he got an order for $50,000—100 built computer boards for $500 each—that was high money. Now it was almost like we were big-time. We were going to sell some com- puters. Sure, we only sold 150 (maybe less) of the Apple Is, but it was a real computer and we had our name in all the magazines with charts and compar- isons. This whole industry’s springing up and there are articles about it. And no article could skip a company with a name like Apple.

Man, when I actually finally put together this little circuit and put some data into memory that should show up as color and it showed up color, it was just one of those eureka moments and you’re just shaking inside. It was just unbe- lievable. Here we had it in just a couple of chips. I had color, and then I had graphics, and then I had hi-res, and then I had paddles and sound to put games into the machine. It had dynamic memory—it had the newest right type of dynamic memory that could expand almost forever. All sorts of slots with a little mini–operating system that actually worked incredibly well. The Apple II was just one of those designs. Anybody could build things to add on to it, anybody could write programs, they could write sophisticated programs, they could write it in machine language, they could write it in my Basic. So that machine, there was just nothing stopping it.

We knew we’d sell 1,000 a month, but we couldn’t afford to build them. So we sought money, and one of the first places we went to was Commodore. To the guy who had been the product marketing manager for the 6502 micro- processor that I had chosen. That’s how we bought our first microprocessors that became the Apple I and Apple II, from this guy Chuck Peddle. He now was moving to Commodore to do a computer. We said, “We’ve got to show him the Apple II.” So we brought him by the garage. I really respected the guy; he designed the microprocessor that I had chosen. He came to the garage and looked at the Apple II, and I put it through all its specs of bringing up quick patterns on the screen and scrolling text and playing games—all the things I’d done on it. He looked at it and didn’t say too much. I figured he’d be more impressed. We later heard that Commodore turned it down.

Andre Sousan very soon after (within weeks) left Commodore and came to Apple saying that he felt we had the right product and he wanted to be with us. They just missed the boat. I think it was that Chuck Peddle knew what he could design, but he knew that he couldn’t design what the Apple II was. They should have bought it. They would have had a real good deal cheap. After that, we were still seeking money. I wasn’t really seeking the money, Steve Jobs was. I mean, I almost couldn’t have cared less. If I could show it off at the club and get credit for having a great computer design in my life, that’s what I wanted. 

Well, actually we never did much in the garage. People think we had a garage where we sat down with soldering irons and we designed stuff. No. The only designs that ever took place in the Apple I or II for hardware or soft- ware were in my apartment in Cupertino or my cubicle at Hewlett-Packard late at night. That’s the only place any building got done.

Mike was going to finance us, and then one day he said to me, “You have to leave Hewlett-Packard.” And I said, “Why? I designed two computers and cassette tape interfaces and printer interfaces and serial ports and I wrote a Basic and all this application software, I wrote demos, and I did all this moon- lighting, all in a year.”

I wanted to design computers and show them off and make software. And I can do that on my own time. I don’t need a company to do it. So there was an ultimatum day—I had to decide by a certain day if I was willing to do this. I met Mike and Steve at Mike’s cabaña at his house in Cupertino. Eventually we got around to it, and I said, “I’ve decided not to do it, here are my reasons.” Mike just said, “OK.” Steve was a little more upset.

That day my friend Allen Baum called me in the afternoon, and he said, “Look, you can start Apple and go into management and get rich, or you can start Apple and stay an engineer and get rich.” As soon as he said it was OK to do engineering, that really freed me up. My psychological block was really that I didn’t want to start a company. Because I was just afraid. In business and politics, I wasn’t going to be a real strong participant. I wasn’t going to tell other people how to do things. I wasn’t going to run things ever in my life. I was a non-political person and I was a very non-forceful person. It dated back to a lot of things that happened during the Vietnam War. But I just couldn’t run a company.

But then one person said I could be an engineer. That was all I needed to know, that “OK, I’ll start this company and I’ll just be an engineer.” To this day, I’m still on the org chart, on the bottom of the org chart—never once been any- thing but an engineer who works.

What about Ron Wayne? Steve knew Ron at Atari and liked him. Ron was a super-conservative guy. teve had 45 percent of this partnership, I had 45 percent, and Ron had 10 percent, because both of us agreed that we could trust him to resolve any dispute, and we would trust his judgment.

Do you remember any disagreements you had in the early days? Extremely minor. There were a couple, maybe. One was that we’re getting close to shipping it and we wanted things to be low-cost. Steve says, “Can we save any chips?” He’s pressing me and pressing me. I am down to like what is just amazing in the world. People to this day that understand circuitry tell me how they looked at my design and it was the most beautiful thing they ever saw. So I said, “I could cut out two chips if I skipped high-res. I don’t know if anybody’s really going to use high-res.” (It became very important actually.) And Steve said, “Oh no, if it’s only two chips, leave it in.”

When you showed people the Apple computer, were they amazed? Every single time I showed the Apple II, before we started the com- pany and even slightly after we started the company—before there was much word around about it, every single person who ever saw it . . . The engineers at Hewlett-Packard came to me and said, “That’s the best product I’ve ever seen.” And they’re around one of the greatest products of all time—the Hewlett- Packard calculator—and one of the greatest companies, and they’re saying things like that.

What is the key to excellence for an engineer? ou have to be very diligent. You have to check every little detail. You have to be so careful that you haven’t left something out. You have to think harder and deeper than you normally would. It’s hard with today’s large, huge programs. I was partly hardware and partly software, but, I’ll tell you, I wrote an awful lot of software by hand (I still have the copies that are handwritten), and all of that went into the Apple II. Every byte that went into the Apple II, it had so many different mathematical routines, graphics routines, computer languages, emulators of other machines, ways to slip your code in and out of an emulation mode. It had all these kinds of things and not one bug ever found. Not one bug in the hardware, not one bug in the software. And you just can’t find a product like that nowadays. But, you see, I had it so intense in my head, and the reason for that was largely because it was part of me. Everything in there had to be so important to me. This computer was me. And everything had to be as perfect as could be made. And I had a lot going against me because I didn’t have a com- puter to compile my code, my software.

Did you have a hard time getting everyday people to say, “Yeah, I want a computer in my office, my home”? lmost everyone who saw it wanted one, but usually the idea was, “What’s the cost?” A couple thousand bucks. “Well, I want one of those.”

Any other eureka moments in the early days? I’ve told you two major eureka moments. One was getting color to work, with this weird scheme that I had no idea if it’s going to work or not. The other was that I didn’t know if I was going to get Basic to program an arcade game, and it worked. In both those cases, I didn’t even know if it was possible and lucked out. The floppy disk was probably the third real major eureka story.

Mike Markkula wanted to get going right away on the marketing. He ran the marketing for the company. Marketing largely meant, how are you going to present the computer to be acceptable in the home? How do you move “com- puter” from a word that’s yucky and airplane cockpittish to acceptable in my home? And that had to do with different types of photography, pictures, set- tings, words to the press. He also wanted us to start getting to work on software that would apply.

He basically wanted us to write a flash card program. So Randy Wigginton and I did a flash card program called Color Math and it shipped with every Apple. We also did one called Checkbook, which would let you reconcile your checks on the computer. But here’s the problem: you had to first read the Checkbook program in off of a tape, then twiddle your thumbs for a minute and it goes “beep”; then you have to pull out another cassette tape of your own and read your checks in and it goes “beep”; then you have to do the stuff on the screen, enter some more checks and reconcile them; and then you have to put that data cassette back in and record onto it and it goes “beep.” You have all these waiting periods, and it was just too awkward and too slow. So Mike said we needed two things: a floating point Basic (that’s a Basic with decimal points, which I didn’t have) and a floppy disk.

What advice would you give to hackers who are thinking about starting a company or making something on their own?

First of all, try to have the highest of ethics and to be open and truth- ful about things, not hiding. If you have to hide something for company rea- sons, at least explain what you’re doing. Don’t mislead people. Know in your heart that you are a good person with good goals because that will carry over to your own self-confidence and your belief in your engineering abilities. Always seek excellence: make your product better than the average person would.

If you can just quickly whip something out and it’s done, maybe it’s time, once in a while, to think and think and think, “Can I make it better than it is, a little superior?” What it does is not necessarily make the product better in the end, but it brings you closer to the product and your own head understands it better. Your neurons have gone through the code you wrote, or the circuits you designed, have gone through it more times, and it’s just a little more solidly in your head, and once in a while you’ll wake up and say, “Oh my god, I just real- ized a bug that’s in there, something I hadn’t thought of.”

Lack of tools: find a way to do it. If you say, “I have to have a tool,” and you are a prima donna—”I have to have a certain development system”—if you can’t figure out a way to test something and get it working, I don’t think you’re the right type of person to be an entrepreneur.

Steve and I never really had an argument. Nobody ever saw us have an argument. The disputes were very rare and minor, of any sort between us, and they were usually just misunderstandings. 

The hardest thing was, though, after having a big success . . . see, I didn’t seek the success—I wasn’t like the entrepreneur who wants it. So the money to me didn’t really mean much. Pretty much I gave it all away to charities, to museums, to children’s groups, to everything I could. It almost was like an evil to me. That was because it wasn’t the motivation that I was after, and I wanted to remain the person that I would have been without Apple. So that’s why I went back and did the teaching. I would have done teaching were there no Apple.

## Joe Kraus Cofounder, Excite

When you got the VC money, I read that you had to think hard about how you were going to redistribute the stock. You described it as a “couch moment,” right—where you would pull the couches face-to-face to discuss dif- ficult situations? This presumes that starting a company with your friends is bad. And there are some things that are bad about it. It makes it hard to be objective about personnel decisions. “Remember, I can’t fire my friend, but I can fire my manager.”

But we would have never, ever survived as a com- pany without having something bonding us other than the pursuit of a business idea. Because we came together to start a company before even knowing what that company was doing. We were more committed to the idea of starting something together and figuring it out than a bunch of people who were only personally interested in how much money they could make or what could be built around a particular idea.

I think, quite honestly, nobody had a problem giving Graham more, because Graham was clearly the man among boys in terms of his technical ability. The other guys were smart, but they did what Graham asked them to do and Graham was the guy who really architected the whole thing.

But we ended up working through it. I don’t remember the specifics of the conversation. I remember it being very awkward and I remember it being quiet. People were unhappy. No screaming or anything like that, but awkward.

What about your first version? Did it seem like you were onto something huge? The hardest part in a startup is that you wake up one morning, and you feel great about the day, and you think, “We’re kicking ass.” And then you wake up the next morning, and you think “We’re dead.” And literally noth- ing’s changed. You haven’t made some big deal, you haven’t sold something new. Maybe you wrote a few lines of code over the course of that last day. Maybe you had some conversations with people, but nothing’s really moved.

What did people misunderstand most? Microsoft’s CTO, Nathan Myhrvold, yelling at me, “Search is not a business. People are just going to search a few times and then bookmark what they want to go to.” The second was that nobody knew what the business model was going to be. In fact, Excite really never got the business model right at all. We fell into the classic problem of how, when a new medium comes out, it adopts the practices, the content, the business models of the old medium—which fails, and then the more appropriate models get figured out. For example, all the television pro- gramming in its early days looked like radio. It was literally the same guys read- ing the radio program on television, and it was extraordinarily boring. And advertising was radio advertising—the announcer reading the ad.

We too adopted the business model of the prior medium, which was print. Cost per thousand impression (cpm)-based advertising was how we made money in search, and that was wrong. We never figured out the cost-per-click piece of it. We got too buried in our legacy of cpm-based advertising and that’s how we died. 

By 1997 everybody was diversifying into portal strategies, because nobody knew how to make money from search. Search was viewed as the traffic direc- tor to other more profitable businesses, when in reality, search was the business.

We were too young to realize that existing companies’ biggest problem is legacy. Period. They can’t focus on new businesses because they’ve got to manage their old ones. And so when we moved to web search, it was never clear to us that Verity, PLS, and Open Text wouldn’t actually go and do this. But they couldn’t because they were servicing all their existing busi- nesses and could never invest enough in this new kind of business.

When Microsoft made its buyout offer for Excite in late 1995, they offered about $70 million. We’d just launched in October ’95 and they’re offering $70 million. We said no, and we told them the number needed to be more like $100 million. And apparently what happened is—and I only learned this story recently—the negotiator we were working with went back to Gates and said, “I think the number’s going to be $100 million if we want to do this.” And Gates said, “How much would it cost us to do it our- selves?” So the guy went away and built a plan and said it would be about a year and $25 million and 25 people or something like this. And the interesting thing is that they didn’t buy Excite for the $100 million, and they didn’t invest and build it themselves. Instead they did nothing.

How did you get the Netscape search button deal? We needed distribution—we needed eyeballs and more people to be trying Excite. The natural point of dis- tribution was the browser. The only real point of distribution. No websites had any traffic of any size to do a deal with. It was the browser getting bundled in that made the big difference. So we went to Netscape. They had two buttons on the browser: NetSearch and NetDirectory. NetSearch was pointing to Infoseek and NetDirectory was pointing to Yahoo. And those deals were free; it was just free traffic to those services. Unbelievable. So they finally decided to put these two buttons up for bid and there were three bidders: us, Infoseek, and MCI (with a rumored new service).

We had $1 million in the bank and we didn’t know what we were going to bid. We sat down in my office, all on the floor. Vinod said we should bid $3 mil- lion. I was like, “How do we bid $3 million? We only have $1 million in the bank.” And he said, “Well, if we win, I’m pretty sure we can raise it, but if we don’t win, I don’t know how we’re going to raise it.” And so I thought, “OK, this is really scary.”

We decided to bid $3 million. We had no way to pay for it, but we weren’t going to reveal that. We bid the $3 million and we lost. Vinod told us this whole story about how he’d gone through a similar situa- tion at Sun in losing a deal, and he just never gave up and won the deal back. He said, “We haven’t lost. Let’s meet with them. Let’s show up in their lobby unannounced.” We did all this stuff; we called them constantly; we just basically acted like the bidding wasn’t over. And made a total pain in the ass of ourselves. It would have been embarrassing if it weren’t so serious.

Then luck struck: MCI couldn’t deliver its service to Netscape on time. Netscape wanted its money and they wanted to have a vendor in that slot, so they came back to us and said, “OK, we’ll take your $3 million and you can be in the NetDirectory play and good luck.” I can tell you that, had we given up, we never would have gotten the deal back. And without that deal I don’t think Excite would have had its run at all.

That was what helped launch the company. It’s so ironic. If you look at the way that a lot of huge companies get built . . . Microsoft built itself off IBM, unwittingly. Excite built itself unwittingly off Netscape. Google built itself unwittingly off Yahoo. I don’t think we would have gotten where we got without the Netscape deal and we certainly wouldn’t have gotten the Netscape deal without a really valuable lesson in persistence.

Some famous person said, “Success is 50 percent luck and 50 percent pre- paredness for that luck.” I think that’s a lot of it. It’s being ready to take advan- tage of opportunities when they arise.

The other thing that surprised me was how well companies can do if you challenge them with these big, crazy goals. When we launched in October ’95, we were number 17 in a 17-horse race. We said to the company in January ’96, “We’re number 1 or number 2 by the end of the year or we don’t matter.” We did a lot of crazy things—from acquiring companies to building new products to distribution deals. How is it realistic to say that you’ll go from 17 to 1 or 2 in a year? It’s crazy, but the company rallied around it. I’m surprised really pleas- antly by the ability of people when challenged to rise to the occasion.

Venture capitalists, with the exception of people like Don Valentine, would tell you that they’d rather fund a great team than a great idea. The reason is that if they have a bad idea, great teams can figure out a better one. Mediocre peo- ple even with a great idea can screw it up in its execution. Or if they have a bad idea, then they aren’t going to be in a position to think about how to change it.

One is hiring slowly and more carefully. Another is be cheap, cheap, cheap. Also, get the legs of the business underneath it before you run terribly fast. We were always playing catch-up at Excite and I never liked that feeling. You always felt like the traffic, the momentum, the deals were all ahead of where the business naturally was. You want to be ahead of where it naturally is, but you don’t want to be two times ahead of it. So, I think really taking the time to understand the dynamics of the business, so we can scale it, is important, along with being cheap and hiring well.

## Dan Bricklin Cofounder, Software Arts

Dan Bricklin and his friend Bob Frankston founded Software Arts in 1979 to produce VisiCalc, the first electronic spreadsheet. Spreadsheets used to be made on paper. When their first release shipped in October 1979, it ignited the personal computer software revolution. VisiCalc was the “killer app” for personal computers: businesses bought Apple IIs just to use it.

When I started programming, he had graduated and was running this busi- ness selling software on cassettes out of his apartment in Allston, Mass. He was looking for new stuff, like a checkbook program. I actually prototyped VisiCalc on one of his machines over one of the vacation weekends. I went to his place and wrote a prototype in Basic. Then we started discussing that they would publish it. As MBAs (both he and his partner were MBAs), they understood the value of this thing. They already had a need listed in their list of things they wanted of financial stuff. And they were looking at other financial forecasting tools, but this also would do checkbooks and other stuff. So they knew they could sell it as that; they knew that they would use it. And we made a deal to produce it.

No, I had been thinking of the idea; I had daydreamed about it. I had actually done a prototype on Harvard’s computer system that was available to us as students. As part of the prototyping, I came up with what we have today: the A-B-C 1-2-3 type of thing, the columns and rows ways of indicating things; the idea of having a formula on what we call the contents line that tells you what you’re pointing to; moving around where you could move the highlight around from cell to cell—that whole thing. The idea and some of the prototyping had been done. The actual trying it on a personal computer was written in Basic to see what it would feel like. And then we actually programmed it in assembly language starting the winter of ’78/’79.

I had originally wanted the thing to use a mouse. There was no mouse on the Apple II at the time, so I was using the game paddle and turning it. But the way I was doing it with the game paddles, the cursor was just too unstable. So I switched to the arrow keys, which were much more discrete.

I learned some computer things. I had it make a sound every time it recal- culated a cell, but it turned out that the making of the sound on the Apple used up three-quarters of the CPU time, because it did it with a timing loop. People who saw it, who needed it, got it. Sorry, no—some of the people who needed it got it. You have to be a person who is able to look at a general- purpose tool and be able to think, “How would I use that to solve my problem?” Most people are not that way. They look for a tool that is being used already for something close to their problem and then understand what it is. Many people who saw the spreadsheet with an example, if the example wasn’t in their field, they couldn’t make the leap. Because they’re not programmers in their mind.

But, if you showed it to somebody where it clicked, either because they understood the general-purpose nature and could apply it to their own needs, or you showed them an example, like financial forecasting or something that they did, and they knew the other tools in the world, they got very excited. If you showed it to a computer person who didn’t have those needs, they’d say, “That’s kind of cool, but what’s so special about that? I could just do it in Basic.” Now, there were those that hadn’t seen as interactive a computer before, weren’t as aware of word processing and some of the other things, and, when they saw it, it really opened up their minds to what you could do interactively with computers.

Who were the very first users? There was Al Sneider, locally, who was at Laventhol & Horwath, which is an accounting firm, and he started pushing them to use personal com- puters. They did a lot of accounting for the gaming business. They actually used VisiCalc to figure out how to lay out a casino and where to put which slot machines, I’m told. There were doctors who had bought personal computers because they thought it would be kind of cool, who used it for, I think, anesthe- siology calculations in open-heart surgery.

Hewlett-Packard got it. One of my classmates from Harvard Business School worked in the group that was developing a personal computer there, and they read Ben Rosen’s write-up, and Hewlett-Packard licensed it and did their own implementation based on our software.

What were the biggest conceptual hurdles for you as you were building the product? So I had this idea, this general two-dimensional layout, and I had the idea of calculating and then recalculating, because it’s like word wrap; it does that. So those ideas came up right away for me. But then how do I really express that? What exactly are the keystrokes that you do? What exactly is the metaphor? How do I make it easy to learn? 

The challenge was, how do you express the value you’re typing in, the for- mula you want to calculate, its location, and the precision of the decimal points, and how wide are the columns and all this stuff? Is it an integer, is it a floating point number? How do you specify all that? In computerdom in those days, that was the most yicky stuff of any computer language—the format statement in Fortran, and COBOL’s pictures and all that. It was just such a mess. How do you get the output specification of how it looks?

I ended up with WYSIWYG, like people had done in typesetting. How do you marry that with calculating? There I came up with use of the grid as a way to be able to name things. The big problem for me was, how do you name things? How do you name the value? In the old days, it’s like, variable name equals expression, right? That’s how computers work. Well, this was, “What’s the variable name going to be?”

Today it seems so natural: you use A1. Well, first of all, it was A1, not 1 comma 1. It is too many keystrokes, it’s not normal for people, and there’s a whole lot of problems with it. By going to the map coordinate type of thing— A1, G7, or something like that—that was something I knew regular people would understand. But it also parsed well: anything that starts with a letter was obviously a variable name, because numbers always start with a number, or a plus and a minus or something. So it made it really easy to make it obvious what you were typing in. So, if you said 1 + A1, I knew exactly what it was. But, if I said 1 + 1,1?

We had very little memory space to give you in the way of help, but if you hit /, it listed all the letters you could type. If you typed a letter, it would give you the name of the command that you were doing and any options. So basically, it was always prompting you with what you could do next, once you learned to do the / key. And, of course, we could use /, because / is an infix operator, not a prefix operator, so you always knew that if something started with a /, it had to be a command. But, if it started with a +, it’s going to be a number. So it was one of the few characters around that was good for that. And it was not shifted (I hate holding control keys down), and computers had used / as commands before, so it was a natural thing to use, for me.

When 1-2-3 came out, those were the things people asked. “Does it have commas in numbers? And dollar signs before the numbers?” I think we had dollar format, which meant .00. But did it do commas, did it have variable col- umn widths, and did it have the long labels? I remember Vern Raburn telling me those were three of the main questions that he was asked, and then people said, “Fine, I’ll buy it.” So those were features we didn’t have that would have been nice if we did. We knew we needed those, but there was just a limit to what we could get done and would actually fit and work in the original product.

We worked out of Bob’s attic until around when we got delivery of this computer that we bought, a time-sharing computer. Bob wrote an assembler and linker for it, and I wrote an editor for it so that we could do our work. We hired an employee or two, and they helped us finish the actual product and then convert it to other machines.

Bob wrote most of the code, and then this person we hired, Steve Lawrence, and myself wrote the rest of the code. I got the transcendental func- tions to work, the sine and cosine, stuff like that. There were bugs in divide, and Steve got those things working. We had the beta version of it ready, I think, in the late summer, together with a self-running demo version of it that was actu- ally macro-driven—that basically had a long macro that would just run that was just keystrokes driving the thing.

There were panic moments in the business, but they had nothing to do with programming. We were working in a basement in Central Square. We were next to the T (the subway) right near the Kendall Square Station. The T went right by us, and every time it went by, everything would shake, because, literally, it was a few feet in front of us.

We were below street level, so, when it rained, the toilets would back up. When it rained, whenever you left the building, you had to remember to turn off the toilet, or else they would back up. We missed one, and it started flood- ing, and the water started pouring toward our computer. I have some pictures of me there with one of those wet vacs as the water just missed our computer! Our life savings are in this one computer—life savings plus some money from relatives, plus personal guarantees on the loan.

I wrote an accounting system. Not only did I write the editor, I wrote an accounting system for us, and I did all the bookkeeping. I mean, here I am, a business school student taught to do accounting by a wonderful professor of accounting and then taught cost accounting by Jim Cash, who’s now on the Board of Microsoft, but I’m now trying to figure out doing debits and credits by hand. I didn’t know what the real world had on that. And I was doing my own bookkeeping. I wrote a system to do it.

Do you remember when you finally thought, “OK, this is a big deal?”  It felt like a really big deal when I started having people I didn’t know in the regular part of the world knowing about spreadsheets and taking them for granted. When the Wall Street Journal ran an editorial about the budget in Washington and said, “Yellow ledger pads and VisiCalc spreadsheets all over Washington are trying to figure this out,” that really hit me.

IBM came to us wanting VisiCalc on the IBM PC, and when they ran the advertisements on TV, they showed VisiCalc (or they showed what they said was VisiCalc; it was a mockup that they did) with Charlie Chaplin pushing a button. When Apple ran an ad, they had Dick Cavett—who had never done ads on TV before—and he would push a button and up would come VisiCalc on the screen. Now, here’s EDS, that has infinite computing power available, with any software of the big financial forecasting systems, and all that, and they’re using VisiCalc to price multi-million-dollar deals! I found out that investment bankers who were doing real deals were using it. When the people you looked up to as the pros have switched to your stuff, that meant something.

Stay out of lawsuits if you can help it. It’s bad for both sides, especially small businesses. That’s lawyers’ business, to them, solving things through law- suits. But it’s very, very expensive. It’s a sport of kings, and it uses up a lot of time. Unless you’re a very big business that can make it a very small part of what you do, it’s much better to find other ways to solve things. Frequently, individu- als can do it better face to face. People who are the heads of companies under- stand that.

What I do realize is there are advantages to selling at a peak. You don’t know when the peak is. I know people who sold their businesses when everybody thought you were crazy. “The business is going through the roof; why are you selling now?” And in hindsight, of course, it turned around. Six months, a year later, the business started crashing. They didn’t get the peak, but they came pretty close.

There are some people to whom it’s worth taking the risk, because you risk going for the big one, and, in a portfolio, that’s good. But as they say on Wall Street, the bulls make money, the bears make money, but the pigs get slaugh- tered. In other words, don’t be greedy. Whether you think things are going up or things are going down, you can make money going both ways. But, if you are piggish, are greedy, that’s when you have problems; you’ll be irrational about that.

A lot of people make money because they’re very good at timing. We were close. If we hadn’t been sued, I would have done pretty well financially, because Bob and I owned most of the company at the time. And we would have had an interesting next step, going into what was probably the leading online business at the time. Maybe it would have ended up into the Internet or something, or it would have made the jump better. Who knows? But it didn’t happen.

Yeah, it was out of our hands. If we had been able to settle in advance, the thing would have closed, and we would have made a lot of money, and we’d have a bigger house, and whatever. But, you know, as I always tell people, here it is, 25 years later, and you’re still interviewing me. There’s fame and fortune. I didn’t get much fortune out of it, but, on the other hand, the fame has basically given me a meal ticket ever since, and I learned a lot from it, and the rest of my life has been pretty good. All in all, I can’t complain. I did a lot better than I ever expected to, in all sorts of ways. So there are no regrets about that. I mean, each thing, you think, “Well, if I had put this feature in, it would have been better.”

At the last minute, when the company was about to go under, we found some people who were willing to buy the company, but they wanted me to spend a year working for them, and I was not happy about this at all. I ran into Mitch Kapor on an airplane, and we talked. That’s Monday. Friday night, Lotus bought our company—they bought the assets of the company. So finally we sold the company, and I’m out, with no strings attached. That was great. And then we have to finally sell off all our stuff, because they did an asset deal. So people had to stay on to close down the company and all the liabilities for a year or two; it was a mess.

## Mitchell Kapor Cofounder, Lotus Development

Mitch Kapor founded Lotus Development with Jonathan Sachs in 1982. Their spreadsheet software, Lotus 1-2-3, quickly surpassed VisiCalc to become the new industry standard. isiCalc had been the original “killer app” for personal computers. Kapor was a VisiCalc product manager at Personal Software when he wrote VisiPlot and VisiTrend, companion products to VisiCalc. He left to found Lotus just as legal conflicts were distracting VisiCalc’s developers, and the arrival of the IBM PC opened a window of opportunity for a better spreadsheet. Lotus 1-2-3 could handle
larger spreadsheets and added integrated charting, plotting, and database capabilities. It became the killer app killer. 

How did Lotus get started? I thought I was just going to clean up this little product over Christmas break so I could finish my education. I would make some money and that would be that. And I only thought that because I was totally ignorant about how long things took. I had no background in computer science. I was self-taught—I was still writing in Basic. I had no management experience; I was in business school at the time. In fact, I had spent my years after college as a radio disk jockey on a progressive rock station. I was a transcendental meditation teacher, and a mental health counselor at a psychiatric unit of a community hospital. That was OK, because there wasn’t really a personal computer software industry. It was still kind of a hobby thing becoming a business, and nobody really took this stuff seriously, so I wasn’t ludicrously unqualified by the standards of the day.

But I was wrong about how long it was going to take to do this thing. I was inspired to want to do a really great job by VisiCalc, which was so much better than anything I could ever write. But I said, “I want to try to do something that could stand up well.” And I faced a difficult decision because school was start- ing again. I took a leave of absence from school to finish the product.

I didn’t know what done was with software. I had, roughly speaking, an alpha version of the product—it had some demonstrable features. I decided that I needed to totally rewrite Tiny Troll to be much better, and give it a totally new user interface, and so on. Based on that misunderstanding of what done was, I said to the publisher, “What I want to do is to come out to California”— which was where they were—“and you should hire me to be your new product manager. I can finish this thing in my spare time. It’s almost done.”

So here’s the way the world looked to me at the time: I have a hit product— not a number one product, but it’s making money. And it has an insupportably high royalty rate. I no longer work for the publisher, but I know how they think and I’m uncomfortable with them. And I know they don’t want to work with me. So I felt what I should do is to have them buy me out. They would get con- trol of the code, close out the royalty stream, and I would go do whatever I was going to go do next. I saw that was in everybody’s interest. And that’s in fact what happened. They bought us out for $1,200,000, so I made a whole bunch of money. I had never made more than $14,000 a year—I told you what kinds of jobs I had. We had taxes to pay and I had a partner to take care of, but I wound up with $600,000, which I divided into two piles.

The galvanizing event was when IBM announced the IBM PC in August 1981. It was very important in the history of PCs because it legitimized the whole field—because of IBM’s imprimatur. Until then, the personal computer hardware companies were Apple, Tandy, and Commodore. IBM was the first “real” computer company to come out with a PC, legitimizing it for the business marketplace. And that was not lost on me.

So we decided to bet on doing something for the IBM PC, which proved to be one of the reasons why we were successful. They had decided to outsource a lot of the key elements of what they were doing, right to the distribution. Rather than selling it just through their own sales force, they were selling it through retail stores like Computer-Land and Sears, which at the time was a very radical idea. They had gone to Intel for the microprocessor; they had gone to Microsoft for the principal operating system. And I said, “They’re smart. They realize they don’t understand this business, so they’ll go to the best people. They’re not going to have a lot of ego, and this is the way things are going to work.”

The Apple II had 64K—not megabytes, kilobytes—of memory. It was tiny. And not all of that was available. Actually, if you wrote programs on the Apple II, you started with a 48K memory space. So the programs were tiny and the user data was tiny and people were building spreadsheets that exceeded memory. It was a fundamental limit of the Apple II, because it was an 8-bit microprocessor. IBM used a 16-bit microprocessor and I said, “Ah, this will permit people to build bigger spreadsheets.” The memory space of the IBM PC when it came out was 640K, 10 times the size. So I said, “16-bit, faster proces- sor, more memory says IBM. We should target it. We should build a product that is optimized for it.”

Yes, I think the one-button graphing in particular, and the speed of the calculation. VisiCalc users loved VisiCalc; they just wanted it to do more. And it didn’t. And when we showed that this did it right out of the box, they went, “I get it.” I used to get applause doing demos all the time.

Because they were writing for an 8-bit machine, and they didn’t take advantage of the 16-bit architecture in a whole variety of different respects. We just had more optimized code. And we had a different recalculation algorithm. We were the first spreadsheet to do something called “natural order of recalcu- lation.” If your spreadsheet had forward references in it, VisiCalc would take multiple passes over the whole thing to calculate stuff, but we did one pass through the entire formula chain, and as long as there weren’t circular refer- ences, it would calculate properly. So it was much faster for certain cases.

And Sachs was also very, very good. He was just an artist at high performance with limited resources. I didn’t know how good he was; I got lucky. I knew he was good, but he was a genius at this sort of stuff. The two of us together was essentially 1 + 1 = 3, because I had a vision about the product and very strong ideas about the fea- ture set and the user interface, and he was generally willing to let me drive things at that level. He had the responsibility for the technical architecture and implementation, but I’m actually quite technical, so I was able to talk with him to fully understand a number of the issues and limitations and modify the design in a way that was consistent with what we could actually do. So we had a critical mass of knowledge between the two of us that neither of us had alone.

ost of my mistakes came after we launched the product, not before—after we started shipping in January of ’83. I had no significant experience in building an organization or building a management team. And I intuitively did well when I was leading the whole team, but once we got past 25 people, you can’t do that. And so I made a series of classic mistakes in hiring. And not building a good middle management structure. And not recruiting a board that could help me build the company.

I did not set out to build a big company. I actually wanted to be a software designer. I saw having a company not exactly as being a necessary evil, but there wasn’t a good alternative. My experience had convinced me that being a pro- gram author and having somebody else publish it wouldn’t give me enough con- trol over the process. In Hollywood, the very successful directors like Steven Spielberg quickly understood that they also needed to be producers and have their own studio in order to retain control. It was a similar thing.

I was interested in really cool products, so I guess that’s where that came in. I had a very unconventional background and really no interest in building a button-down business culture. And I’m not an engineering geek, either. These types of companies tend to reflect the personalities and interests of their founders. Microsoft is very much cast in Bill Gates’s image; and Apple, Steve Jobs; Borland, Philippe Kahn. And so we tended to have more creativity and innovation.

The other thing that I cared about a lot right from the very beginning was creating a workplace that treated people well. At Software Arts, they felt I had attitude problems. I didn’t respect authority. I basically thought, “The people that are running this are stupid and they don’t listen to me and I don’t like being here, being told what to do.” It was a mixture of keen insight and adolescent emotions that I carried for a very long time. So when I unexpectedly found myself running this high-growth successful software company, the thought of making it be the kind of place that I would want to work at and different from all those other places was incredibly appealing.

What advice do you give to people who want to start startups? It depends on what type of advice they want. You can’t tell people what they don’t want to hear because they won’t care and it’s just a waste of breath. And everyone comes in with some kind of agenda.

I like working with entrepreneurs who have a compatible set of values and are inspired by a vision and are passionate about some piece of disruptive tech- nology—who are going to create something that actually has value for people in a way that can be a game changer. That’s sort of my sweet spot. But every proj- ect is different, so the specific advice needs to be customized.

The most important thing for me is, I don’t want to work with someone who says, “Just help me make the business be more successful.” I want to work with entrepreneurs who are personally passionate, committed, and believe in what they’re doing. Not all entrepreneurs are like that. Some people may be just as happy selling canned tuna—“Just show me an opportunity where I can make money and I’m going to go do that.” You think Mark Cuban really cared about what they were doing at Broadcast.com? This is not to criticize him as a busi- nessman—I’m just observing—but I don’t think he had a fundamental passion about that business. There was an opportunity, he saw it, he built something, he sold, and he cashed out at the right time.

When you were developing Lotus 1-2-3, you always had working code. Wasn’t that type of incremental development very much ahead of its time?

Yes. I think Sachs and I saw it the same way. We figured out a number of things very early on that became conventional wisdom. I’m not sure that we were that much smarter than anyone else. But we had the requisite smarts and we were in the right place at the right time. So this developing close to the tar- get machine and having code running, it seemed obvious once you looked at it that there were enormous benefits to it. The reason it wasn’t obvious is that the machines were barely powerful enough to do development on.

And always having something running was a Sachs thing, because it was just his experience it was a good thing, and I saw it and said, “Yes indeedy, we should do this,” long before extreme programming.

What would you tell an entrepreneur to understand before he/she meets with a VC?

I try to explain how it works. There are more choices nowadays for people—angel money, for example. And many things are much less expensive to do now. You can go further on your credit card than you could before. I want entrepreneurs to make informed choices when it comes to financing. Under- stand what the impacts and implications are for different financing options.

## Ray Ozzie Founder, Iris Associates, Groove Networks

_At the University of Illinois, Ray Ozzie worked on PLATO Notes, one of the earliest collaboration applications. After he led the development of Lotus Symphony, Mitch Kapor and Jonathan Sachs decided to invest in Ozzie’s idea, which would become Lotus Notes. Instead of working as an employee, Ozzie founded Iris Associates in 1984 to develop the product for Lotus. Lotus Notes was the first widely used collabora- tion software. The first release shipped in 1989, and
Iris was acquired by Lotus in 1994. In 1997, Ozzie founded Groove Networks, which built Internet-based work-
group collaboration software. Microsoft acquired Groove in 2005 and named Ozzie chief technical officer. In June 2006, he took over as chief software archi- tect from Bill Gates._

When we first started Groove in the fall of ’97, we worked out of my house. Initially, it was my brother Jack, Eric Patey, and Brian Lambert. A few weeks later, we moved to an office space at the Cummings Center in Beverly, Massachusetts. A couple months into the project, another former Iris engineer, Ken Moore, joined our team. The first thing we coded was a primitive version of our synchronization algorithm.

The common theme to both Iris and Groove was the fact that the ideas were not based on technology, but on a need I saw for users or potential cus- tomers for the product. I’m an engineer by training and I tend to be one of these people who believes he can accomplish basically anything in software— it’s just a big toolbox. So if you know that you can accomplish anything you set your mind to, what’s worth accomplishing?

With Groove, it was an observation that the nature of work was changing. Technology at that point had largely been applied to helping people work together within corporate boundaries. People were increasingly going to be challenged trying to apply that same technology across boundaries, because you can’t control the technology chosen by your business partners. I might choose Notes, you might choose Exchange, the other person might choose someone else.

We saw a lot of frustration when our customers tried to deploy systems across enterprises. So we came to the conclusion that what we really needed was to build a system that just worked instantly, right after download, for the end users.

Before I start a company, I typically write a couple of founding docu- ments. One of them is very outside-in: it’s a scenario-based document, describ- ing the high-level challenge that I’m trying to address and the end user scenarios that we are trying to solve. This attempts to explain what we’re trying to accomplish to anyone who joins the company or we might need to get financ- ing from.

Then I create a second, bottom-up document describing the different tech- nologies that will have to be assembled to accomplish that vision.

The first thing we did in both Iris and Groove was get a big open office and recruit a core team of people. Generally these were people I’d worked with before, so I wouldn’t have to get past the trust issue involved in understanding what they are good at and what they’re not.

And we’d just sit down with the whiteboards and just try to work through some of the more difficult algorithms, make key tooling decisions. Early on in Groove, we had a very big decision to make: do we do it in C++ or do we do it in Java? These types of decisions are important because you can never go back on them once you’ve started down that path.

In Groove’s case, there was a very risky piece of technology—a certain algo- rithm for synchronization that we didn’t even know if we could do. And we did- n’t want to hire more people and really get going until we knew we could accomplish it. It took about 3 to 4 months before we were confident that we’d be able to actually build what we wanted to.

It had been done for years in a variety of settings—especially in an aca- demic setting. But the commercial PC environment is a very harsh one. People reboot PCs, they restore them from backups, they lose them. It has to be very resilient. We wanted to make sure the algorithms we were using would scale to what we needed.

The thing that’s not really characteristic, that doesn’t really translate from both of my startups to what other entrepreneurs do, is that I think of the challenges I take on as 10-year challenges, not filling a quick market niche. There tends to be some time where I’m building up a level of technological advantage for when we get to market. With technology, there’s no such thing as a sustainable advantage, but you can get a good running start if you concentrate on doing something hard really well.

Some people cope with uncertainty by being really comfortable in their own little box. Some developers, for example, will divide the problem and divide the problem until they only have to work on this little piece of the database or this little piece of the communications, and they just don’t worry about the stuff above that. They leave that to people like me to deal with, in terms of the risk and continuing to be on the right path. To be on that long of a time frame, you have to be able to change as the market changes.

In a startup, you’re on this mission together. Everyone has to feel that, and you have to hire people who are willing to believe in something they are trying to accomplish. And in that era, it was very challenging in two dimensions. Hiring in the dot-com era, when a lot of these people’s friends were getting rich, was hard. But the other thing was that the type of software we were build- ing had many systems software elements to it. A lot of it was lower-level com- munications, storage, application framework–type code, and hiring was more difficult for that type of talent at that time. In an earlier era when DEC was big, it was easier to hire systems software talent.

But what held people together was the belief that you’re really going to change the world. I think that’s the nature of many startups. You believe that what you are doing is going to have a dramatic impact. You might not exactly know how, but you really have a belief. That keeps you going and going through many changes and a lot of uncertainty.

But eventually I took some money from Mitch Kapor and then others. Not so much because I needed it at that point, but because I knew that, ultimately, you cannot accomplish some- thing completely on your own. You really need to develop a network of people who win when you win. Being on the East Coast, I believed that it was very important to establish a good network in Silicon Valley, where I didn’t have a presence.

In a startup environment, it’s much rougher in terms of making your num- bers. There’s much less patience. Once you start down the treadmill of taking venture capital, it’s “how many rounds before people give up on you or you have a positive exit event?” So you’re really setting yourself up. The best by far is to structure it such that you don’t have to take money.

If there’s going to be a trend that’s largely horizontal, Microsoft cares. Because Microsoft’s bread and butter is serving the masses—whether it’s con- sumers or enterprises—with low-cost technology that solves many problems. And other people layer upon it more vertical solutions. We were pitching Groove as a fairly horizontal technology. We were apply- ing it to productivity challenges, but to the extent that it had the potential to catch on broadly, they would certainly have been the biggest competitor.

If you believe that Microsoft is your competitor, it’s better to keep stealth and then embrace them at the right time, when you believe it can be to your advantage to embrace them. In the case of Groove, we were having distri- bution challenges, we needed money, we were raising a round. One of the biggest questions we were encountering with our enterprise customers was “Why isn’t Microsoft just going to crush you tomorrow?”

I guess as a tech entrepreneur I would nurture relationships with people who are outside your skill set on the marketing and sales side or business devel- opment side. Relationships you know you can trust. As a technologist, it’s very difficult to hire someone on the marketing and sales side because they’re so dif- ferent than technologists and you don’t know who to trust. It takes about a year to really understand whether the people who you are partnering with trust you and know they will rely upon you just as much as you know you will rely upon them.

That’s where I think working for another company and building those rela- tionships is extremely valuable. Frequently, people think just running from school out into doing a startup is the best thing to do. But I think that getting some experience within a number of companies is really positive because you meet people and you start to develop patterns in your mind of the types of peo- ple that you need, and the types of people that you can trust, and the types of people you never want to work with.

For someone who’s joining a startup, just learn about leadership from the people at the top of the company. Watch how they talk to people, watch how they present to people. Companies take their shape based on the personal- ity characteristics and human interaction characteristics of the founders. This is true in every company. Learn about the kind of culture that you want to create in your own company based on the positive and negative aspects that you wit- ness in the people that are your leaders.

Learn to respect and appreciate other people’s skill sets, because you are going to need other people if you do start a company and you are a technologist. Understand that it’s a rare, rare case when a tech entrepreneur is the right one to lead a startup for a long period of time. You have to feel comfortable in your own skin in terms of what you’re good at and what other people are good at. Know when the shift to chief technologist is the right thing for the company.

veryone knows that one reason you go to work and do what you do is the hope that ultimately you’ll be compensated. But you don’t have to say it, and it doesn’t have to come through. It should be about the mission. It should be about changing the world. It should be about how you can impact the lives of users, partners, and the employees themselves. It’s not just about this big pay- day. The more you focus on the things that matter when you are talking to peo- ple who want to believe in you, the more they will believe in you and the more it will be a sustainable entity.

## Evan Williams Cofounder, Pyra Labs (Blogger.com)

_Evan Williams cofounded Pyra Labs in 1999. Origi- nally, Pyra intended to build a web-based project management tool. Williams developed Blogger to manage his personal weblog, and it quickly became an important mechanism for sharing ideas internally at Pyra. Once launched publicly, Blogger grew rapidly, and Pyra Labs decided to focus on it full-time. But Blogger.com did not generate a lot of revenue at first, and as the Bubble deflated in 2001, Pyra seemed near death. Williams remained as the only employee and
managed to bring the company back from the brink. By 2003, Blogger had one million registered users. That attracted the attention of Google, who made Pyra their first acquisition. Williams left Google in 2004 to cofound a podcasting company called Odeo._

I had never even really worked anywhere. I was just totally self-taught tech- nically, but I started a company and kind of ran it into the ground over 3 years or so, and it was a very educational, painful experience. But I knew I was going to do that again. I just always knew I was going to start my own thing.

I moved to California to take a job with O’Reilly, which ended up being very fortunate as you’ll find out later. I worked there for a few months, though I knew I didn’t want to work for anyone. I taught myself web development—this was in the middle of the boom and there was lots of work to be had as a con- tractor. I knew I was going to start another company. I just wasn’t ready yet. So I was a web developer on contract for about a year and a half, and worked in various companies like Intel and HP. Finally I got to the point where I said, “OK, I am going to start another company.” This was very much in the middle of the boom.

Around the time I was thinking about starting the company, I was talking to a friend of mine, Meg Hourihan. She got excited about the idea and said, “Hey, let me start it with you.” She had been a management consultant and was really smart, so I said OK. I had been contracting, so I had a little bit of money, so I could coast for a little while, but we didn’t know anybody. We weren’t hooked into the startup scene.

Everyone was getting funded, but it is still completely just a network. You have to know the right people. Whether it’s good times or bad, you have to know people and you have to talk their language, and we were just from a dif- ferent place and not hooked into that at all. So we just said, “OK, here is the product we are going to build,” and we started building it. We actually kept con- tracting on the side—I had a contract with HP. That’s how we paid the bills— we turned my personal contract into the company’s contract and we did a little work on that and we did a little work on our project, and that is how we started.

The first year was entirely self-funded. It was just doing this work mostly for HP. HP basically funded Pyra for the first year, unbeknownst to them, because at the time you could charge a decent amount of money for doing pretty simple web application development. If one of us was working on that full-time, it would pay for three of us (not that we were paying ourselves much). We started working on things in November ’98. We technically started the company in January. Meg started full-time in February, and we hired our first employee, Paul Bausch, in May. Then we got an office down here in SOMA.

It was easy, and that was a key thing for me because I wasn’t lacking the knowledge about how to publish to the Web . . . For a long time, people understood Blogger as “It makes it easy to have a website.” But a lot of things before that made it easy to have a website. GeoCities made it easy to have a website, but they didn’t make it easy to publish anything on an ongoing basis. So, for me, the idea that I could have a thought and I could type in a form and it would be on my website in a matter of seconds completely transformed the experience. It was one of those things that, by automating the process, com- pletely morphed what it was I was doing. If I could have a thought and then put it on my site, then obviously I am going to potentially do that much more and it is a stream for communication of a whole different type.

We took the script I wrote to publish my site, and we made an internal site where we could do the same thing. So, even when it was only Meg and I, we had this little internal blog we called “Stuff,” and we just put stuff in there. It was a blog, but it was just, “Here’s a thing from a competitor or a potentially useful page or just information for each other.” It was a place where we col- lected everything and, as we grew, it was the center of Pyra. It was where things happened.

So this whole time we are building our real collaboration tool, with all kinds of structure and big ideas trying to be implemented into it, but we were really using Stuff a lot. And then Paul wrote a little addition to Stuff so that certain things we posted to our internal blog we could put on our external company blog.

We were one of the first companies to have a blog on their site—not that many people were reading. But it was neat. We were publishing news, random things we liked, whatever.

That’s when I got the idea for Blogger—I know because I registered the domain then. I totally pictured what it was because it was based on what I was already doing and then the way we were publishing our own blog to an external site. I said, “Let’s turn that into a product.” I have always been a prod- uct guy and am just always thinking about products and thought this would be a cool little idea.

While it did seem fairly easy to build, it was a dilemma, because one of the big lessons from my first company was to focus. After my first company died, I did an inventory of the projects I had worked on in the last year. There were something like 30 projects that I had started on and not finished. My total weakness was not focusing on things. So I had this idea and I loved it, but very clearly we were only three people and we had to contract to pay the bills and we couldn’t start another product. We had this big thing we were trying to do. So it just kind of sat in the back of my head, but it wouldn’t go away. It kept bugging me. Of course, what made me still think about it was that we were using it for our own purposes and we were building this collaboration tool, but we were doing this kind of collaboration with Stuff. We actually said several times, “Maybe Stuff should just be our product?” And we agreed, “That’s too simple, that is too trivial.” And also we didn’t have the resources for two products. So that went on for a long time, and it was in July, I guess, when we finally launched Pyra, the app, and that actually got a pretty good, if limited, reception.

People started using Pyra and it was in evolving it that I came up with the justification for why to do Blogger. That was based on the idea that we were trying to solve a really, really big problem, which is organizing people’s informa- tion of all types. We said, “That is too big a problem to start with, so we should focus it.” We decided to focus it on people who were building websites, as a place for them to collaborate. Then we thought up this architecture where there would be little mini-apps, and Blogger would be one of those. So, with that justification (Meg was actually on vacation for a week), Paul and I built Blogger and launched it while she was gone. Which was a terrible thing to do, but ultimately a good thing to do—but not a cool thing to do.

It caught on a lot more than we expected. It was really designed to appeal to web geeks. It wasn’t a mass consumer product. It was, “If you’re a web geek like us, you might find this interesting.” It’s good to appeal to the alpha geeks sometimes. I thought it would be pretty cool if 1,000 people used Blogger. It didn’t explode at first because it was fairly technical. You had to have a website and you had to know what FTP was. You had to know a bunch of stuff, but things that you would know if you were a web geek. We put it out there and people started using it and the existing weblogs started pointing to it. Like Peter Merholz (he is credited with coining the term blog), who pointed to it. It started getting traction and a lot of people who were like the “cool kids” were using our product, and we were really excited.

We launched it in August and we had a dilemma on our hands right away, of course, because we now had a product that people were using, but it wasn’t the “real” product.

The problem was, we didn’t see a business in Blogger. This was during the boom, but we weren’t one of these companies that was just, “Let’s get eyeballs.” We were very product driven. We wanted to create cool stuff, and we wanted it to have a sustainable business. We wanted to probably sell the com- pany to somebody eventually, but we didn’t see any business model with Blogger. Also, we hadn’t raised money, so making money was pretty important.

We thought Blogger was this free little thing that would get people to pay for the real thing. So we very clearly had a dilemma on our hands: we could focus on the stupid little Blogger app that people were using, or we could work on our real product. We tried to split our time amongst those two things and contracted to pay the bills. We were three people, so that was a little bit difficult. We had endless debates about what to do about that. I think we ended up doing another rev on Blogger in November that made it much better, and then people really started using it.

There were a couple other products out there, but they weren’t very substantial. No one was really paying attention to it. It’s hard to fathom now, but blogs took a really long time to be taken seriously. But, yeah, we felt we needed to make it a lot better and spend a lot more time on it, and we didn’t have the resources to do that. But at the same time, we didn’t think there was a business there, so we weren’t that concerned about it. All the time, of course, we are debating whether or not there was something there and debating why it was appealing to people. I thought about it a lot and I came to the conclusion why it was appealing and the impact it had, and I started to get some insight about its potential.

It was kind of the first time that I had started really seriously thinking about media, and then at the same time Pyra had all these big ideas that were going to take a really long time to build, and this was much more fun. So I said, “Well, we can figure out a business. We can charge for pro accounts and we can license it to companies and we can just make up the obvious businesses around it (even though they weren’t necessarily that strong).”

 We had most of the features planned that later became standard in the blogging world—and some that haven’t yet. We were totally focused on building the product and community around it once we had raised the money, because this was still, “you get enough eyeballs, you have buzz, you’ll be fine.” And the extent of the crash didn’t dawn on us that quickly. I don’t think it dawned on a lot of people. We just wanted to build momentum with this $500,000 and then raise more money later in the year.

At the time it was pretty much the belief that, if you have buzz and you have users and you have good seed investors, you can raise more money. We said, “We’ll make money, but this is down the road so we don’t need to focus on that. We are going to focus on building more features and getting more users.”

Other companies at the time were going into enterprises, since companies had money. At the time it was like, “Consumers aren’t spending money. Go to companies—they’re the ones with money.” So many companies at the time took their consumer Internet thing and made it an enterprise Internet thing and then died anyway. We debated that a lot. We had a good story about why this was really useful inside companies, and we had a friend at Cisco who wanted to use it and we got it installed inside of Cisco. It was just a pilot and we started saying on our site, “We have enterprise Blogger.” But there was a lot of pressure internally, a lot of debate about just doing enterprise, which I was pretty adamant that we didn’t want to do because, whether or not it would make money, I thought it was pointless. At this time I was very much excited about the idea of democratizing media and that’s what mattered. It mattered more than the company, really. When you are in that mode, it’s hard to say that the company doesn’t matter, since everyone’s heart and soul is in it, not to mention their livelihood.

Nick and his cofounder, David Galbraith, were fans of Blogger and wanted to buy us. It wasn’t a particularly attractive offer, but we were on the brink and thought, “Maybe we can get in there and everyone would have jobs.” Everyone in the company wanted to do the deal but me. But I had con- ceded, because I wasn’t going to be the asshole who denied the chance every- one had to still be employed. We were out of money. Fortunately Moreover’s board wouldn’t approve the deal. It was some ridiculously lowball offer—it was something like a million dollars worth of their stock. But they’re a private com- pany. So it was basically like, “We’d give everyone jobs.”

So this is December or January of 2001 and the second potential acquisition hadn’t worked out, so basically we got to the point where we sat everyone down, and I said, “OK, everyone is laid off as of today, including me.” We had warned them a few weeks earlier that we didn’t have money in the bank to meet payroll. Obviously when you are in that state, tensions rise a lot and morale wasn’t good and relationships with my cofounder weren’t good. I said, “I am going to stick around because I took a half of a million dollars of other people’s money. And we have all of these users.”

In January, right around the time that the rest of the company was being laid off, we did what we called the Server Fund Drive. We posted it on our website and it said, “Hey, we know Blogger is really slow. It’s because we need more hardware. We don’t have the money to buy it. So give us money and we will buy more hard- ware and we’ll make Blogger faster.” Surprisingly, it worked really well. We had a lot of goodwill and people liked us and we had a good brand within our users because we were very personable and used the blog and we were just honest. We just said, “We can’t buy hardware, but we have plans and we are not going to go away if we can get past this hump, so send us some money.” So people sent us money.

We told people we were only going to buy hardware, so I wasn’t going to use that to pay people. I just spent that money on hardware, but it got the site back up and running well and meanwhile we laid everybody off. Meg and I weren’t getting along well at all and she decided to leave and everybody else decided to leave too.

Yeah. I think a lot of that came back to the enterprise thing, which she and some other people felt strongly was our best chance of making money. If I was the guy in charge and we were dying, it’s reasonable to conclude it’s my fault. And certainly there were other things I could have done. So everybody left but me. (A lot of them needed to leave since we couldn’t pay them any- more.) Everybody left, and the next day, I was the only one who came in the office.

That was a really bad time. Actually the day that everyone told me they were leaving . . . I told everyone they were laid off and said, “Work with me if you can.” And at the time, everyone had already missed one paycheck, and they’d had it. These are, of course, my friends, and we were hanging out all the time and we socialized together, so it’s much more than just the employees. I think that same night I broke up with my girlfriend of 6 months.

The good news about all that was Blogger was still running and, with no employees, we didn’t have expenses. So we went from having $50,000 a month worth of payroll, to a couple of thou- sand for our server infrastructure and our rent. It is probably closer to ten, between five and ten, but a manageable number, not paying me anything. I took some money every once in a while to pay rent, and I had long since put all my money in and credit cards and everything else, but that was actually a much more reasonable place to be because we didn’t have to make $50,000 a month to pay people. We had to make a few thousand dollars a month.

One of the first opportunities was a little company called KnowNow, who wanted us to build something, and later actually two of the people who worked at Pyra, including Meg, worked for this company, and I did a little deal with them to build something that was never launched. They killed the project, but it got me $35,000, which was like months of burn rate at that point.

We were pretty public in terms of our communication, so I posted when everybody left, and I wrote this whole story on my blog that was pretty widely read, “Here’s what happened: everyone’s gone. It’s just me.” I got a huge outpouring of support from that, and one of the messages was from Dan Bricklin, who said that he thought what we did was great and he wanted to help. We ended up meeting at an O’Reilly conference, which was in February 2001. We met and he basically agreed really quickly. He assessed the situa- tion—what I needed to keep going. (We had a lot of back bills at this point; we needed to pay our hosting bill to keep the lights on.)

First of all, I had to keep the service running, which was a really big deal in itself—we had several thousand users and I had to teach myself Linux system administration and Java, so I could just keep the servers up and fix bugs here and there. Things would break, and I’d go in and fix them on the live site and figure it out as I went. That was very time consum- ing. The technology wasn’t rock solid by any means, and it kept growing and growing and I didn’t want to shut it off. Between that and fulfilling on these deals, which were mostly giving stuff to other people, I wasn’t building in the real things that were going to make a business. That was a lot of just day-to-day, by-the-skin-of-my-teeth stuff for several months. Still I had the idea to build a paid version of Blogger, but that was going to take a lot more development and work to launch that.

The other thing was that all those people left, and then I was being bad- mouthed within this community of people we knew. The story apparently was that I fired all my friends and I didn’t pay them and took over the company. It was really ugly, and of course we had all these mutual friends and there were parties we were at. I basically went underground and did nothing but try to keep Blogger going.

Which I think is a theme for startups in general because people live and breathe them and become friends, date and merge their lives together. And then, if things go bad, it’s bad in ways that are much more devastating than your work going badly.

Then eventually I started launching some for-pay features of Blogger. Things that people would actually pay for. So 2 years into it, Blogger itself was starting to make money—not directly but through some little ways. Like the blogs we hosted, we had advertising, which never made any money because it was during the time when web advertising didn’t make money. (After it made money the first time and before it made money again.) I created a mechanism to charge people to take their ads off and that actually made money. I said, “Pay me $12 a year, and I’ll take the ads off your blog.” I started with this “product” because it was probably the easiest thing I could build that I thought people would pay for. And they did.

I did a couple other small things like that and got to a point where it was paying the hosting bill. I had gotten rid of my office by then, and I had no place to work at home. So I posted on my blog that I needed to rent a desk some- where. This company, Bigstep, offered me a free desk, which was nice.

Then I just started building more things. Working from the Bigstep office, I designed and launched the Blogger API, which didn’t make any money, but became important later. I actually hired a contractor programmer and had started working with Jason Shellen on business development stuff. So things were looking up. And then 2002 was a completely different year altogether.

We finally launched Blogger Pro, the paid-for version of Blogger. The paid- for version of Blogger did very well for us and we brought in some other people. With Jason’s help, we did a big deal in Brazil with this company that wanted to license Blogger. So 2002 was a ramping-up year again. Everything was on the uptick, and we had a completely different team. We were getting by and the money was increasing and we were building new stuff and it was looking good.

October 2002 was when Google came knocking. We had a small office downtown—more of a conference room than an office. It was Adaptive Path’s first office, which we moved into after them. And we had brought on a tech support guy and a sys admin. Then Google called us up. I forget how that happened . . . I think that was O’Reilly again.

Soon after, according to the story I heard, Larry or Sergey were on a call with Tim and Tim mentioned us, and Sergey had recently been at this confer- ence where everyone was talking about blogs, and was interested in blogs and he said, “Yeah, we want to talk to them.”

We’re like, “Alright. Why?” It didn’t even occur to us that they might want to buy us because Google hadn’t bought anybody at this point. And they were a search company. So we brainstormed all these ideas maybe we could do with Google and we went down there, and it turned out that we were meeting with their corporate development people—meaning the people who buy companies. We started talking about ideas and within the first 5 minutes they said, “Yeah, there’re lots of ideas, but it’s hard for someone like us to really partner with someone so small as you; why don’t you just come here and do all that stuff?” So we were like, “Oh, that’s interesting.” (We tried to play it cool.)

What Google said was, “Would you consider being acquired?” And we said, “Well, we’ve talked to people, but Google’s never asked before.” Like everyone else, we thought very highly of Google, and we said, “Let’s talk about it.” Four months later, we were sitting in Google.

Mind you, it wasn’t an easy decision. I struggled hard deciding if going to Google was the right thing to do. We weren’t desperate. We actually had a term sheet on the table for $1 million in investment from Joi Ito’s Neoteny (who ended up investing in Six Apart). And after 4 years of pouring my heart into Blogger, I saw a lot of risk in giving up control.

At what point did you most want to quit? There were a lot of points in 2001 that I seriously considered quitting. Everybody I knew just thought I was crazy. And I was getting negative feedback on the Web; people who used to be my friends were posting negative things about me. We’d gotten enough press at that point . . . the Industry Standard, which was the bible of the dot-com era, had this annual list, the Net 21, titled something like, “The 21 people who had made lemonade out of lemons,” and I was one of them. It was pretty cool, but the title for me was “The Idealist” because I hadn’t sold out. Like I had a chance to have riches and I didn’t. Someone took that and wrote a parody: “The Egoist.” Because there was a story—not really on the surface, but very clearly underneath the community that I was previously a part of—that was a very negative story about what hap- pened in the last days of Pyra, because all those people left and they weren’t very happy (completely understandably).

For the most part, the old Pyra employees were cool with it later. But, during 2001, these stories got out that I took over this company and kicked everyone out and was just this terrible guy. That was the worst part.

And I was writing this service that was free and thousands of people used it, and all I heard were the complaints when it wasn’t working. So for many rea- sons it was bad. I don’t know how close I came to quitting. I don’t think I was terribly close, even though I should have been. I was always hallucinogenically optimistic. That’s the only reason I kept going. Not because I thought I could take this suckiness for a long time, but that it’s going to be better tomorrow. I had all these big ideas, and I could never stop thinking about the product and the thing I was going to build next.

For example, when the site got hacked on Christmas day. I was in Iowa, visiting my mom, and I didn’t find out until the next morning. Someone was able to run an update on the database that changed thousands of users’ passwords to the number 1 (which people started to realize when they couldn’t log in and used the forgot- ten password feature to get theirs via email). Having your site hacked is stressful enough, but here I was in Iowa trying to assess the damage over a dial-up connection and a tiny laptop. And I didn’t have a sys admin or anyone else working for me at the time. I ended up spending most of the day in a Kinko’s doing damage control. So much for enjoying the holidays.

I think one of the things that kills great things so often is compro- mise—letting people talk you out of what your gut is telling you. Not that I don’t value people’s input, but you have to have the strength to ignore it some- times, too. If you feel really strongly, there might be something to that, and if you see something that other people don’t see, it could be because it’s that pow- erful and different. If everyone agrees, it’s probably because you’re not doing anything original.

I had the personality that never liked school and rejected the normal way of doing things. Even when I was in school, I’d try to make up alternative solutions to math problems.

Another thing is that luck comes in many forms—and often looks bad at first. I always look back on the deals that we didn’t do and the things that didn’t work out, and realize what seemed like a bummer at the time was really lucky. Like the early acquisition opportunities. These obviously would have been really bad, as opposed to what happened later. Through that whole experience that’s one of the biggest things that I’ve taken away: if you have some plan and it doesn’t go that way, roll with it. There’s no way to know if it’s good or bad until later, if ever.

ne thing that I used to be bad at was paying attention to how other people are feeling. So when problems came up with some of my coworkers, it totally surprised me. That stuff shouldn’t surprise you, and it did.
I think I was also surprised by the success of something so simple. That’s a mantra for many people in the technology world—simplicity. But what we built wasn’t that amazing. It was the idea of putting a couple of things together and being able to establish a lead by doing something really, really simple. How far you can get on a simple idea is amazing. I have a tendency to add more and more—the ideas always get too big to implement before they even get off the ground. Simplicity is powerful.

## Tim Brady First Non-Founding Employee, Yahoo

_Yahoo began in 1994 as a collection of links to research papers maintained by two Stanford grad students, Jerry Yang and David Filo. They gradually added links to new types of information, and the site grew rapidly in popularity. By the end of 1994, Yang and Filo were considering turning the site into a startup, and they asked Tim Brady to write a business plan for it.
Brady had been Yang’s college roommate and was by this time getting his MBA at Harvard Business School. Brady initially expected to be able to finish the semester, but as Yahoo’s potential grew, it became clear that he couldn’t wait. He turned in the company’s business plan as his final assignment in the courses he still needed to pass, and jumped on a plane west to become Yahoo’s first actual employee.
Brady’s title during his 8 years at Yahoo was VP of Production. His respon- sibility, as he puts it, was “product.” He was effectively the editor of Yahoo’s site. Yahoo went public in April 1996, and for nearly all the period since has been the most popular network of websites in the world. Ultimately, Yahoo won the portal wars because it was a better site, and it was the site it was largely because of Tim Brady._

So Jerry gives me a call in the beginning of my second year of B-school and says, “My trailer mate and I started this thing, and it’s really starting to ramp up. I’ll have you take a look at it.” He wasn’t looking for advice; he was just telling me what he was up to. I looked at it and was blown away—the whole Web thing. I had been on AOL, I knew a bit about the Internet, but nothing about the Web. It was still pretty early then.

The story I’ve heard from Jerry and Dave is that they were both doing their PhD theses and all the technical papers that they would have to reference were online, so they were trying to keep track of them all. They had this big list, and then the EE graduate community—not just at Stanford but all the major EE graduate programs—found out about it and sent them emails saying, “Can you add this?”

In their spare time, Jerry and Dave would add categories they were inter- ested in. Jerry, having just come back from Japan, was very interested in sumo wrestling, so he had this great sumo category. Everything on the Web related to EE they had in their list and then these other interesting areas. It was early enough that it was really the only thing out there—big lists, anyway. There were small lists, but nothing big, and so people just kept sending emails asking them, “Add this to the list. My friend told me about this list; I’d love to add this.”

They were entertaining taking money and had decided, “We don’t want to sell ourselves. Let’s go for it, why not?” Even though people were more than happy to give them money, they thought, “We need a business plan to take around on our VC visits. Even though we can talk to them about it and they would probably give us money without it, it would be better if we had a busi- ness plan.” I said, “Well that’s good, because I’m taking a couple classes where I need to produce a business plan. Why don’t you send me your thoughts, and I’ll put something together.” They sent me their stuff, I wrote a business plan, they took it around to a couple VCs, and I ended up turning it in for final grades for a couple classes.

No one had any idea how big the Internet was, but the model was adver- tising. Advertising was well known, so it wasn’t like we were making up advertis- ing. HotWired, which was the online version of Wired magazine, was online by that time, and they were selling advertising. So there was a model out there, but certainly there were no search engines or directories selling advertising. I just used your basic business plan format, incorporated Jerry’s and Dave’s ideas, and added a few of my own.

We had enough traffic to go sell advertising. We knew if we sold ads on all our pages as of then, at a $20 CPM, that would cover our costs. It’s hard to remember back what your mindset was, but I know it wasn’t, “Let’s get every- one on the Internet.” That was way beyond us. The mindset was more like, “Let’s not let this sink the company; let’s keep it going.” And part of that was just making money, so we did a bunch of crazy things in addition to advertising to try to bring in money. We made book deals and a bunch of little things that really didn’t add up to anything. But we did anything in the name of getting money while we looked for proper management. Because we all knew it wasn’t us.

“If this thing is going to be as big as we want it to be, we’re not the people to run it,”—although we’d have loved to. So we had a CEO search for 6 months. It was really 6 months of struggling between then and when we got Tim Koogle to come.

 Netscape was the only browser back then, well before Internet Explorer. They had a directory button that was part of the browser, and they linked to us from that button for free. Netscape’s job actually was to grow the Internet—the way they were going to make money was to get everyone on the Internet and then sell servers. So anything with the purpose of getting people on would help them. They thought Yahoo was the best thing out there, so they gave us the link. It made sense for them at the time. That was big. It sent our traffic through the roof.

 We put up graphics, which was a big thing. That sounds really ridiculous now, but at the time Yahoo was all text. The connection speeds were so poor that any website that used a lot of graphics made the site unusably slow . . . Most of the traditional media folks didn’t get it because they didn’t realize that people were dialing in on slow modems. But we knew that if we were going to have any sort of brand, it would have to be a graphic. So we made the graphic switch at the same time we put up advertising.

 We started to hire and build an organization without the CEO. We had tem- porary management that Sequoia helped us find—a CEO and CFO. Because we weren’t having success finding a CEO, Sequoia insisted that we hire these managers. That didn’t go great. They weren’t as vested in helping Yahoo long- term as we were. There was a clear divide between someone who was interim and someone, like myself, who was fully invested in making it work. I had moved my whole life from the East Coast for it; my fortunes were tied to this thing, whereas theirs weren’t necessarily.

 We hired a lot of friends and friends of friends. You always hear “Never go into business with friends.” But with the first 20 hires, everyone knew each other. Consequently there was a high level of trust. Everyone was young. It was pretty much everyone’s first job, with the exception of the interim management. So people weren’t worried where the Internet was going; they were just looking for something interesting to do, and joining Yahoo qualified.

 There were a couple of seminal events where we thought we were going to get crushed by competitors. The first one was the directory button on the Netscape browser became a search button, and Netscape started selling the right to be linked from that button. Architext (later called Excite), which was funded by Kleiner Perkins, was a bunch of undergraduates from Stanford. They bought the Netscape search button with their venture capital money. Netscape was also funded by Kleiner Perkins.

 We bid up to a certain point in which we felt comfortable that we could make a return on money. After which point, we knew it became “investing in the brand,” and I don’t think we felt comfortable investing in the brand at that point. Because we didn’t know how big the Internet was going to be at that point. Even though the press was going crazy, the numbers were still pretty small compared to any other media. I think it was $5 million that Excite paid for that button.

We bid up to a certain point in which we felt comfortable that we could make a return on money. After which point, we knew it became “investing in the brand,” and I don’t think we felt comfortable investing in the brand at that point. Because we didn’t know how big the Internet was going to be at that point. Even though the press was going crazy, the numbers were still pretty small compared to any other media. I think it was $5 million that Excite paid for that button.

Any time you talk to Microsoft, just the way they do business, they have the potential to do whatever the hell they want, so when you go to them their mindset is always, “We could partner with you, or we could do it ourselves.”

Jerry and Dave were way ahead of the curve. The ideas that they had really early on were right strategically and creatively. So everything we did through the middle of ’97, invariably we were first and we did it very well.

The one thing we didn’t do that all our competitors were spending a lot of time doing was search. They were crawling the Web and doing full text search, and our strategy was, “Look, that’s a technology game. We’re not a technology company, we’re a media company. Since there are so many of them out there, we’re always going to be able to rent it.” That was the thought back then, and until Google came along that strategy was perfect. Because, as things played out, that’s exactly what happened.

So what we did was that we searched our directory first, we gave you those results, and then, if we didn’t find anything, we kicked you over to a full-text search. So, when I say we “rented” that technology, we essentially partnered with full-text search companies to be the falloff searches that we had.

No one is ever going to be able to get so far ahead that we’d ever be in strategic risk of kingmaking a full-text search engine, because you just can’t do that. Google ended up doing exactly that. 

One, IPO windows don’t last forever. Markets get hot and then they don’t. If you go out, you can only go IPO while the market’s hot. Netscape lit that market afire for us. The other consideration was that we saw that one of the ways we were going to have to compete was to acquire compa- nies. The best way to do that was to have a currency other than the cash in the bank—to have a stock to pay people for their companies. So, in order to get big fast, which we thought we needed to do, we had to have a public stock. That was probably the biggest reason. Then raising money was obviously a third very important thing we needed to do.

I knew that I liked doing certain things, and, with most people, things you like you tend to be better at anyways. I’m good at building things, products specifically. Creative marketing, product marketing, which I had done earlier in my first job in Tokyo, was what I ended up gravitating toward.

The group of people that we had assembled was just great, so the hours were never dreaded. You enjoyed being at work, even though sometimes it was 16, 18 hours a day. That’s the only thing really specifi- cally that I think back on a lot.

But there were certainly companies that we missed. We missed Hotmail. Jerry and I had dinner with Sabeer Bhatia and Jack Smith, and they were explaining it to us and—I hate to admit it—we were saying, “I see it, but I don’t see how it can get big.” We were on this rocket ship, and they were talking about something that really hadn’t caught on.

What was really central to our understanding of the Internet was that it was this open system where you couldn’t really put up walls. One of the things that I think Filo did a great job of making happen was that, when someone did a search and you didn’t find what you were looking for on Yahoo, rather than just saying, “It’s not here,” or “Go check out this other thing,” he put links to our competitors, then prefilled the query, so you’d just click on Excite and they would do a search on Excite for the same thing.

Certainly they don’t teach you in business school to go point to your com- petitors, but it sent the right message to the users, which was, “It’s all about you. We’re going to get you the data you want. If it exists on the Web, we’re going to find it for you, even if we don’t make money off of it directly.”

: The sex category was probably a quarter of everything on the Web. Not just Yahoo, but everything on the Web. Just like the VHS industry when it first got going. The Internet was no different in that respect.

Do you remember the biggest debate that you got into? There was always speed versus look-and-feel. In trying to grow a brand, look-and-feel has a lot to do with it, as does speed, so there’s always that balanc- ing act. Arguing the necessity of graphics with Filo was always a big argument. I’ll never forget our 8-year debate.

I obviously never had equal weight in that decision. It was always Jerry and Dave, and I don’t know the full list of suitors. I know AOL was a suitor, I know the LA Times was a suitor, and I know they had gotten informal offers from Microsoft—never anything concrete. A lot of them were very early on, before they even took venture money. For Jerry and Dave—neither grew up with a lot of money—to turn down a lot of money at that stage with no guaran- tee of the company doing anything afterwards, was, in my estimation, a big deal. They had a lot of confidence in what they were doing.

The funniest thing I can remember was when there was a huge storm in May of ’95, and the power grid went down for a few days. We had to go rent a power generator and take turns filling it with diesel fuel for 4 days. 24/7. We were laughing, “How many pages to the gallon today?” It was a crazy storm and it also started leaking in our building. We had all these meetings scheduled and couldn’t just shut it down. We had meetings by candlelight with a bunch of prominent companies. They walk in; there are no lights; there are cords run- ning everywhere leading to the generator out back; water dripping from the ceiling. We were trying to convince them, “Oh, yeah, we’re a real business,” when you say, “Hold on, I gotta go fill up the tank.” So I remember that set of days pretty vividly.

“I know you’re tired, I know you’re working hard, but it’s not an excuse for putting out something that looks like a startup.” When Jeff came in, I’d been working hard for 8 months, and I was already a little bit tired, and I didn’t think he would keep up. I didn’t know him all that well, but he had twice as much energy as anyone. We started doing two red- eyes a week to New York for business. “OK, we have to go meet MTV tomor- row. Red-eye out. Meeting. Come back that same day.” We did that for 3 to 4 months, and I just remember thinking when he walked in the door, that I couldn’t work any harder. But we worked harder, faster, smarter. That was defi- nitely a step up in both effort and professionalism.

Any advice you’d give to someone who was starting a startup? Part of it is “know yourself.” Try to do as much thinking up front as to what your breaking points are. One of the things I think I did well was that I never spent any time thinking about quitting or any of these doomsday scenar- ios, “Oh, God, what if this doesn’t happen.” 

Before I joined, I knew where the line was, when I would quit, at what point, and so when I was in the game, it never crossed my mind. I also knew why I was involved, what motivated me, and I didn’t spend a lot of time perse- verating on that stuff. At the end of the day, it wasn’t going to get you anywhere. It mattered, but only in an abstract way, compared to the day-to-day of getting stuff done. Doing all that thinking all up front: why am I getting in, when do I leave, if I leave then why am I doing it, what gets me up in the morning, what could happen that could make me stop getting up in the morning?

## Mike Lazaridis Cofounder, Research In Motion





























