startups/growthhacker-recipes.md, before:

## 11: Hubmetrics Hijacker

HubSpot and KISSmetrics have something in common; they both have a killer inbound strategy.

An oversimplified version of their strategy is as follows: create a great blog which generates traffic, have an offer for a free ebook on every post of the blog, capture the users contact information in exchange for the free download of the ebook, and begin sending them emails with the goal of selling them a subscription to their service. Most people don't attempt this strategy because they don't have the first ingredient (a great blog that generates traffic), but we found a way around this requirement!

1. Create an ebook, select a topic that your ideal user would love to know about.
2. Come up with a name for the guide that cannot be ignored.
3. Don't write a long book, just write 10-15 pages of awesomeness.
4. Make the cover of the book look really professional.
5. Add an extremely high price tag as part ofthe cover design in a prominent place.
6. Until someone gives you an email for the download all they will see is the cover, so that's where you will spend your time.
7. Create an account on Gumroad and upload the ebook. Set the price of your ebook to match the insanely high price tag on the cover. But offer a 100% discounted price.
8. Guest blog on other people's articles to capture the ideal audience. Tell them you'll be writing an article and tell the owner that you'll give away your ebook for free, too. The high price was done to capture everything else.
9. When people click through to Gumroad they need to give their email address away, even for a free download. Remember that the goal is to get a branded ebook in your hands. Then, use the Gumroad API to import the email addresses, or use Zapier to handle the integration with MailChimp.

## 10: Clarity.fm

Clarity (http://www.clarity.fm) is an amazing service that allows anyone to buy expert consulting, conducted over the phone, and you only have to buy a few minutes at a time.

- Search the Clarity.fm catalog for individuals who cannot only give you advice on your startup, but also people that could assist you in deeper ways.
- Now that you have a short list of people that could propel your business forward, by doing more than just consulting, then go ahead and buy 30 minutes of their time, and setup calls with all of them.
- You are going to approach it will a deal that you want to close. Start the call doing the typical consulting stuff. Ask questions, nod your head, have some dialogue, but you are actually there to close a deal.
- Here is how we used this hack at Growth Hacker TV. When we first started we knew it would be difficult to get A-level growth experts to come on the show, so we found the guests we wanted on Clarity and we paid for their consulting. Once we were on the phone with them we closed them on the idea of being one of our first guest. Talking on the phone gave them the ability to see that we were smart people building a real business and that their time on the show wouldn't be wasted. This is how we booked Andrei Marinescu (from Hulu) and Dan Martell (founder of Clarity).

## 9: Instructor Inception

The first thing you need is to find a platform that makes sense for the kind of content you are able to create. If you are able to create video based content then you might consider Udemy (http://www.udemy.com), but if it is easier for you to create written content then you might look at Accelio (http://www.accel.io). These are two examples, but there are hundreds of platforms that are designed to educate through various mediums. Find the ones that fit your skill set.

Once you've created your educational content you must give it away from free.

The email you send your students should thank them for taking your course (or reading your guide, or whatever), and then it should give them a time-sensitive deal to your product (your actual startup). Maybe give them one month free of your service if they use a certain promo code by midnight. Maybe give them 10% off if they sign up in the next 24 hours. You get the picture.

## 8: PR Nuke

1. Create a spreadsheet of blogs/bloggers that could write about your startup. Tools: Alltop, Google News.

2. Translate to the spreadsheet.

3. Use Fiverr for data entry.

4. Mandrillapp to send out the emails. Mandrill will insert the journalist, blog name, email, etc. Remember to include a link in your email to your press kit: Journalists are busy so give them stats, quotes, photos, anything else needed. Don't attach to email. Just link a zip file of the press kit on your own server. 

## 5: Email Sniper

2. Rapprotive extension for Gmail, to know if target is valid.
3. Canned responses within Gmail/settings.
4. Post-send strategy: Toutapp, RightInbox to see when the messages are read.
5. Follow up emails, send it, Check Followup.cc
6. Boomerang gmail extension to schedule calls autom

## 4: Psycho Time

1. The first time someone visits your site they will be in a neutral state. In a neutral state, people just need one good nudge in the right direction and they'll be willing to do what you want. Since we only want to target first time visitors to the site with this tactic you need to install cookies to track visitors to your site. If it is someone's first visit then it will trigger a drop down bar from the top of the site.

2. Hellobar to build a dropdown thingie. It should appear 3-5 seconds after the page loads.

3. Put offer and time limit on the offer. Time limit should only be an hour or so because we want them to make a snap decision.

## 2: Launch Loop

1. Launch page: Logo, big emotional image, headline, sub-headline with the UVP.

2. Instead of asking for an email, have a "tweet to join", make sure you have the company's Twitter handle inside the tweet. Then Once they send the tweet then the "tweet to join" button becomes something for e-mail.

3. Referring to friends' email address?

Commit message:

add gh recipe never breakup

startups/growthhacker-recipes.md, after:

## 12: Never Breakup

It always sucks when a user wants out of a relationship with you and your product. The problem is that we usually view this decision as final. They want out and there is nothing we can do about it. This is a sophomore mistake. They were with you for a reason in the first place, so winning them back is always a possibility!

1. Exit Monitor (http://exitmonitor.com). Now you can track their mouse movements and right when they start to exit your site it shows them a perfectly timed popup to re-engage them. You can offer a deal, capture an email, and more. I guess sometimes being a little paranoid and tracking their movements turns out ok in the end.
2. The question is, what can you do to get people to think twice about their opt-out, even though they already clicked the "unsubscribe" button. Easy. Send them to a landing page that gives them a chance to resubscribe, but use the landing page to show the user how awesome your company is.
3. When you cancel your $49/month account then they ask you if you'd like to purchase their $19/month "essentials" account instead of canceling all together. This is kind of like deciding that you'll stay friends, even if you're not seriously dating anymore. If the down-sell doesn't work then you can move on to the next tactic. Send them a funny breakup email.
4. Delinquent credit card:  "As a Growth Hacker TV member, I wanted to give you free access to my new e-book: ($79) Growth Robot - A guide to automatically growing your startup while you sleep, by Bronson Taylor. The only problem is that it looks like the credit card on your account is not working, so I can't send you any of the member perks. All you have to do is click here to give us an up to date credit card, and I'll send you a copy of Growth Robot for free, which is normally $79, so it's a pretty sweet offer :) "




## 11: Hubmetrics Hijacker

HubSpot and KISSmetrics have something in common; they both have a killer inbound strategy.

An oversimplified version of their strategy is as follows: create a great blog which generates traffic, have an offer for a free ebook on every post of the blog, capture the users contact information in exchange for the free download of the ebook, and begin sending them emails with the goal of selling them a subscription to their service. Most people don't attempt this strategy because they don't have the first ingredient (a great blog that generates traffic), but we found a way around this requirement!

1. Create an ebook, select a topic that your ideal user would love to know about.
2. Come up with a name for the guide that cannot be ignored.
3. Don't write a long book, just write 10-15 pages of awesomeness.
4. Make the cover of the book look really professional.
5. Add an extremely high price tag as part ofthe cover design in a prominent place.
6. Until someone gives you an email for the download all they will see is the cover, so that's where you will spend your time.
7. Create an account on Gumroad and upload the ebook. Set the price of your ebook to match the insanely high price tag on the cover. But offer a 100% discounted price.
8. Guest blog on other people's articles to capture the ideal audience. Tell them you'll be writing an article and tell the owner that you'll give away your ebook for free, too. The high price was done to capture everything else.
9. When people click through to Gumroad they need to give their email address away, even for a free download. Remember that the goal is to get a branded ebook in your hands. Then, use the Gumroad API to import the email addresses, or use Zapier to handle the integration with MailChimp.

## 10: Clarity.fm

Clarity (http://www.clarity.fm) is an amazing service that allows anyone to buy expert consulting, conducted over the phone, and you only have to buy a few minutes at a time.

- Search the Clarity.fm catalog for individuals who cannot only give you advice on your startup, but also people that could assist you in deeper ways.
- Now that you have a short list of people that could propel your business forward, by doing more than just consulting, then go ahead and buy 30 minutes of their time, and setup calls with all of them.
- You are going to approach it will a deal that you want to close. Start the call doing the typical consulting stuff. Ask questions, nod your head, have some dialogue, but you are actually there to close a deal.
- Here is how we used this hack at Growth Hacker TV. When we first started we knew it would be difficult to get A-level growth experts to come on the show, so we found the guests we wanted on Clarity and we paid for their consulting. Once we were on the phone with them we closed them on the idea of being one of our first guest. Talking on the phone gave them the ability to see that we were smart people building a real business and that their time on the show wouldn't be wasted. This is how we booked Andrei Marinescu (from Hulu) and Dan Martell (founder of Clarity).

## 9: Instructor Inception

The first thing you need is to find a platform that makes sense for the kind of content you are able to create. If you are able to create video based content then you might consider Udemy (http://www.udemy.com), but if it is easier for you to create written content then you might look at Accelio (http://www.accel.io). These are two examples, but there are hundreds of platforms that are designed to educate through various mediums. Find the ones that fit your skill set.

Once you've created your educational content you must give it away from free.

The email you send your students should thank them for taking your course (or reading your guide, or whatever), and then it should give them a time-sensitive deal to your product (your actual startup). Maybe give them one month free of your service if they use a certain promo code by midnight. Maybe give them 10% off if they sign up in the next 24 hours. You get the picture.

## 8: PR Nuke

1. Create a spreadsheet of blogs/bloggers that could write about your startup. Tools: Alltop, Google News.

2. Translate to the spreadsheet.

3. Use Fiverr for data entry.

4. Mandrillapp to send out the emails. Mandrill will insert the journalist, blog name, email, etc. Remember to include a link in your email to your press kit: Journalists are busy so give them stats, quotes, photos, anything else needed. Don't attach to email. Just link a zip file of the press kit on your own server. 

## 5: Email Sniper

2. Rapprotive extension for Gmail, to know if target is valid.
3. Canned responses within Gmail/settings.
4. Post-send strategy: Toutapp, RightInbox to see when the messages are read.
5. Follow up emails, send it, Check Followup.cc
6. Boomerang gmail extension to schedule calls autom

## 4: Psycho Time

1. The first time someone visits your site they will be in a neutral state. In a neutral state, people just need one good nudge in the right direction and they'll be willing to do what you want. Since we only want to target first time visitors to the site with this tactic you need to install cookies to track visitors to your site. If it is someone's first visit then it will trigger a drop down bar from the top of the site.

2. Hellobar to build a dropdown thingie. It should appear 3-5 seconds after the page loads.

3. Put offer and time limit on the offer. Time limit should only be an hour or so because we want them to make a snap decision.

## 2: Launch Loop

1. Launch page: Logo, big emotional image, headline, sub-headline with the UVP.

2. Instead of asking for an email, have a "tweet to join", make sure you have the company's Twitter handle inside the tweet. Then Once they send the tweet then the "tweet to join" button becomes something for e-mail.

3. Referring to friends' email address?
