## The Philippines’ Digital Boom: 5 Key Trends for 2014
[Link](http://www.tigermine.com/2014/02/16/philippines-digital-boom-trends-2014/)

1. Internet Access Is On the Rise–But Still Has Limited Reach. Between 2008 and 2012, internet access in the Philippines grew by over 500%, the fastest rate in all of Southeast Asia. Despite major improvements in the country’s digital infrastructure, however, internet penetration hovered at only 36% in 2012, and service quality remains inconsistent across the country.
2. Mobile Penetration Now Exceeds 100%–But Smartphone Penetration Remains Low. Yet smartphone penetration, at 15% in 2013, remains low for Southeast Asia, and users tend to be less active on their devices than in the region’s more developed countries. On average, Filipinos spend less time on their smartphones each day than Indonesians, Thais and Malaysians. They also use tablets less, though tablet penetration is growing too.
3. Social Media Usage Rates Are Off the Charts–But This Doesn’t Guarantee Conversions. 96% of Filipino netizens use social media, which accounts for a whopping 42% of total screen time in the country, more than any other country in Southeast Asia. Facebook and Twitter penetration are among the highest in the world. Instagram and Pinterest are also wildly popular.
4. Filipinos Are Brand Friendly and Ready to Buy–But This Won’t Last Long. In the fourth quarter of 2013, the country led Southeast Asia in online brand engagement across a range of metrics, from social shares to website visits, and across many content channels, from social networks to blogs and online forums. Mobile users in the Philippines are more likely to click on mobile ads than in any other Southeast Asian country, even though they are less likely to see them.
5.  Innovative Startups Show Disruptive Potential–But This is No Silicon Valley. Despite increasing startup activity, however, the Philippines faces some built-in, structural challenges to entrepreneurialism and innovation, including inferior educational opportunities and access to technology; lack of post-seed stage funding for startups; and low performance on many indicators of business friendliness. 

On the economic front, the country posted GDP growth rates of 7.2% in 2013, despite suffering one of the worst natural disasters in the world that year. On the demographic front, half the Philippines’ household population under 23, it is also one of the youngest countries in Asia.

Young people with increasing levels of disposable income are a key target market for many digital technologies and services, so these demographic factors provide fertile ground for digital enterprises of all sizes and shapes.