programming/version-control/pro-git.md, before:

## 1.1 – Getting Started - About Version Control

VC is a system that records changes to a file or set of files over time so that you can recall specific versions later. So you can have multiple versions of a file.

Local VCS(system): Copy files into another directory.

Centralized VCS: CVS, Subversion, Perforce. Central server that contains all versioned files, and a number of clients that check out files from that central place.

Distributed VCS: Every client that uses a file mirrors the repository.

## 1.3 – Getting Started: Git Basics

Git stores references of the files; if they haven't changed, then its just stores a link to the previous identical file.

You have a local version of the stuff you have, without connecting to the remote.

#### Three States
- __Committed:__ Data is safely stored in the local database
- __Modified:__ Have changed the file but not yet committed to the database
- __Staged:__ Marked a modified file in its current version to go into your next commit snapshot.
 
#### Git project
- `Git` directory: where Git stores the metadata and object database for your project.
- Working directory: A single checkout of one version of the project. 
- Staging area: A simple file which contains info on what will go into your next commit.
 
#### Workflow
- Modify files in your working directory.
- Stage the files, adding snapshots of them to the staging area.
- You do a commit, which takes the files as they are in the staging area and stores that snapshot permanently to your Git directory.

## 2.1 – Getting a Git Repository

Navitage to directory
  
    $ git init
    $ git add (whatever you want) *.docx
    $ git add README
    $ git commit -m "initial project version"
    //git add adds to staging phase (and not commit phase). You have to commit them if you want the change to be reflected.
    Cloning
    $ git clone git://github.com/shacon/grit.git

Creates a directory named grit, initializes a .git directory inside it, pulls down all the data for that rep, and checks out a working copy of the latest version.

    $ git clone git://github.com/shacon/grit.git mygrit

Folder's name is mygrit.

## 2.2 – Recording Changes to the Repository

Each file in your working directory can either be tracked or untracked. Untracked: not seen by git.

Tracked files are files that were in the last snapshot; they can be unmodified, modified, or staged.

    $ git status # This would show which files are which and which aren't committed yet.

    $ git reset FILE # Cancels the files you would add before you commit them.

If you stage a file then modify it, then it will be both staged and unstaged. The staged version is the version of the file that you added. The unstaged version is the newest one.

Ignoring files: Check out the `.gitignore` file.

    $ git diff # You will be able to see what you changed and not just which files were changed using this. "Changed but not yet staged".
    $ git diff --cached or git diff --staged # See "staged but not yet committed"
    $ git commit # Tries to push the commit using the default compiler
    $ git commit -m # You specify the change inline.
    $ git commit -am "Hello" # Everything inside the directory that was changed will be added and committed. Doesn't work for new files.
    $ git rm *.txt # This is removing the file from the working directory.

Although Git doesn't track file movement, Git figures things out when you rename or move files.

## 2.3 – Viewing the Commit History

    $ git log # Shows the commits
    $ git log -p -2 # Shows the last 2 commits
    $ git log --stat # Prints a list of modified files, how many files were changed, and how many lines in those files were added and removed
    $ git log --pretty=[oneline|short|full|fuller] # Changes to formats other than the default
    $ git log --since=2.[weeks|hours|minutes]

Time description

  Option        Description
  -(n)          Show only the last n commits
  --since, --after    Limit the commits to those made after the specified date.
  --until, --before   Limit the commits to those made before the specified date.
  --author        Only show commits in which the author entry matches the specified string.
  --committer     Only show commits in which the committer entry matches the specified string.

## 2.4 - Undoing Things

#### Change Last Commit

    $ git commit -m "reasons"
    $ git add forgotten_file
    $ git commit --amend # This is like adding something to the commit that you didn't add. You just have 1 commit pushed out.
    $ git commit --amend -m "thingie thingie"

#### Unstage a Staged File

    $ git add . # benchmarks.rb was added but we don't want that lol
    $ git reset HEAD benchmarks.rb # remove that shit, it's not unstaged

#### Unmodifying a Modified File

    $ git checkout -- benchmarks.rb # the changes you put there are gone, you just copied a file over it.

## 2.5 Working with Remotes

#### Showing Your Remotes

    $ git remote -v #shows the remote branches, and the branch they are pushed out.
    # origin    git://github.com/schacon/ticgit.git (fetch)
    # origin    git://github.com/schacon/ticgit.git (push) 
    # bakkdoor  git://github.com/bakkdoor/grit.git

#### Add a remote

    $ git remote add pb git://github.com/paulboone/ticgit.git
    # now you can use the string pb on the CLI in lieu of the URL
    $ git fetch pb #stuffy

#### Fetch and pull

    $ git fetch [remote-name] #no merging yet.
    $ git pull [remote-name] # attempts to merge

#### Pushing the shit, Remove/Rename

    $ git push origin master
    $ git remote rename pb paul
    $ git remote rm paul

#### Inspecting a Remote

    $ git remote show origin # Lists the URL for the remote as well as the tracking branch information.

> Renaming a remote reference

    $ git remote rename pb paul # Rename from pb to paul

> Tagging [TODO]

> Git Aliases
  
    # you can do git co to checkout stuff
    $ git config --global alias.co checkout
    
    # Combine the unstage and the reset commands to make it easier to unstage things
    $ git config --global alias.unstage ’reset HEAD --’

    # Add last alias to see the last commit easily
    $ git config --global alias.last ’log -1 HEAD’

# 3 Git Branching

## 3.1 What a Branch Is

#### When you commit, Git stores a commit object that contains:
- A pointer to the snapshot of content you created
- Author/message metadata
- Zero or more pointers to the parent of the commit (0 for first, 1 for normal, more for commit from merge)

A branch is a pointer to one of the commits. The default branch name is __`master`__.

A special pointer called `HEAD` keeps track of what branch you are in.

## 3.2 Basic Branching and Merging

> Create a branch and check the branch out, leave it there for the mean time.

    $ git checkout -b iss53
    $ git commit -a -m ’added a new footer [issue 53]’
    $ git checkout master

> Create a branch, make a commit, go back to master, merge the shit

    $ git checkout -b ’hotfix’
    $ git commit -a -m ’fixed the broken email address’
    $ git checkout master
    $ git merge hotfix
    Fast forward

The phrase "fast forward" means that the master branch moved forward into the hotfix branch.

> Once you merged the branches you can delete the hotfix branch.

    $ git branch -d hotfix

Merging: Remove either everything over `====` or under it to `<<<` or `>>>`.

#### Remote branches

Form is `(remote)/(branch)`. So `origin/master`. A pull down automatically names the remote repo `origin` and its branch is named `origin/master` locally, and you can't move it.

#### Pushing

> Push serverfix local to origin:serverfix

    $ git push origin serverfix

> Push serverfix local to origin:awesomebranch

    $ git push serverfix:awesomebranch

#### Tracking Branches

When you clone a repository, it generally automatically creates a `master` branch that tracks `origin/master`. That’s why `git push` and `git pull` work out of the box with no other arguments. However, you can set up other tracking branches if you wish — ones that don’t track branches on origin and don’t track the master branch.

> Get the remote branch and create your own. This creates a local serverfix branch based on the origin/serverfix branch.

    $ git checkout --track origin/serverfix

> Local sf branch based on origin/serverfix

    $ git checkout --track sf origin/serverfix

> Delete remote branch (WTF syntax)

    $ git push [remotename] :[branch]

`merge` vs `rebase`: When merging, you make a three-way thing. When rebasing, you go back to the intersection of the branches and move forward from there. Rebasing is sort of cleaner.

[TODO]

# Git on the Server

# Distributed Git

----------
## [The difference between git pull, git fetch and git clone (and git rebase)](http://blog.mikepearce.net/2010/05/18/the-difference-between-git-pull-git-fetch-and-git-clone-and-git-rebase/)

`git pull`: Pull down a remote from wherever, and instantly merge it into the branch you're in when you make the request. It runs `fetch` and `merge` byt default, or a rebase with `--rebase`.

`git fetch`: Same to pull, but no merging. It creates a local copy of a remote branch which you shouldn't manipulate directly.

`git clone`: Clone a repo into a newly created directory. And it additionally creates a remote called `origin`.

`git rebase`: Pull remote, rewind the local, then replay all the changes one by one.

Commit message:

add stuff on git stash

programming/version-control/pro-git.md, after:

## 1.1 – Getting Started - About Version Control

VC is a system that records changes to a file or set of files over time so that you can recall specific versions later. So you can have multiple versions of a file.

Local VCS(system): Copy files into another directory.

Centralized VCS: CVS, Subversion, Perforce. Central server that contains all versioned files, and a number of clients that check out files from that central place.

Distributed VCS: Every client that uses a file mirrors the repository.

## 1.3 – Getting Started: Git Basics

Git stores references of the files; if they haven't changed, then its just stores a link to the previous identical file.

You have a local version of the stuff you have, without connecting to the remote.

#### Three States
- __Committed:__ Data is safely stored in the local database
- __Modified:__ Have changed the file but not yet committed to the database
- __Staged:__ Marked a modified file in its current version to go into your next commit snapshot.
 
#### Git project
- `Git` directory: where Git stores the metadata and object database for your project.
- Working directory: A single checkout of one version of the project. 
- Staging area: A simple file which contains info on what will go into your next commit.
 
#### Workflow
- Modify files in your working directory.
- Stage the files, adding snapshots of them to the staging area.
- You do a commit, which takes the files as they are in the staging area and stores that snapshot permanently to your Git directory.

## 2.1 – Getting a Git Repository

Navitage to directory
  
    $ git init
    $ git add (whatever you want) *.docx
    $ git add README
    $ git commit -m "initial project version"
    //git add adds to staging phase (and not commit phase). You have to commit them if you want the change to be reflected.
    Cloning
    $ git clone git://github.com/shacon/grit.git

Creates a directory named grit, initializes a .git directory inside it, pulls down all the data for that rep, and checks out a working copy of the latest version.

    $ git clone git://github.com/shacon/grit.git mygrit

Folder's name is mygrit.

## 2.2 – Recording Changes to the Repository

Each file in your working directory can either be tracked or untracked. Untracked: not seen by git.

Tracked files are files that were in the last snapshot; they can be unmodified, modified, or staged.

    $ git status # This would show which files are which and which aren't committed yet.

    $ git reset FILE # Cancels the files you would add before you commit them.

If you stage a file then modify it, then it will be both staged and unstaged. The staged version is the version of the file that you added. The unstaged version is the newest one.

Ignoring files: Check out the `.gitignore` file.

    $ git diff # You will be able to see what you changed and not just which files were changed using this. "Changed but not yet staged".
    $ git diff --cached or git diff --staged # See "staged but not yet committed"
    $ git commit # Tries to push the commit using the default compiler
    $ git commit -m # You specify the change inline.
    $ git commit -am "Hello" # Everything inside the directory that was changed will be added and committed. Doesn't work for new files.
    $ git rm *.txt # This is removing the file from the working directory.

Although Git doesn't track file movement, Git figures things out when you rename or move files.

## 2.3 – Viewing the Commit History

    $ git log # Shows the commits
    $ git log -p -2 # Shows the last 2 commits
    $ git log --stat # Prints a list of modified files, how many files were changed, and how many lines in those files were added and removed
    $ git log --pretty=[oneline|short|full|fuller] # Changes to formats other than the default
    $ git log --since=2.[weeks|hours|minutes]

Time description

  Option        Description
  -(n)          Show only the last n commits
  --since, --after    Limit the commits to those made after the specified date.
  --until, --before   Limit the commits to those made before the specified date.
  --author        Only show commits in which the author entry matches the specified string.
  --committer     Only show commits in which the committer entry matches the specified string.

## 2.4 - Undoing Things

#### Change Last Commit

    $ git commit -m "reasons"
    $ git add forgotten_file
    $ git commit --amend # This is like adding something to the commit that you didn't add. You just have 1 commit pushed out.
    $ git commit --amend -m "thingie thingie"

#### Unstage a Staged File

    $ git add . # benchmarks.rb was added but we don't want that lol
    $ git reset HEAD benchmarks.rb # remove that shit, it's not unstaged

#### Unmodifying a Modified File

    $ git checkout -- benchmarks.rb # the changes you put there are gone, you just copied a file over it.

## 2.5 Working with Remotes

#### Showing Your Remotes

    $ git remote -v #shows the remote branches, and the branch they are pushed out.
    # origin    git://github.com/schacon/ticgit.git (fetch)
    # origin    git://github.com/schacon/ticgit.git (push) 
    # bakkdoor  git://github.com/bakkdoor/grit.git

#### Add a remote

    $ git remote add pb git://github.com/paulboone/ticgit.git
    # now you can use the string pb on the CLI in lieu of the URL
    $ git fetch pb #stuffy

#### Fetch and pull

    $ git fetch [remote-name] #no merging yet.
    $ git pull [remote-name] # attempts to merge

#### Pushing the shit, Remove/Rename

    $ git push origin master
    $ git remote rename pb paul
    $ git remote rm paul

#### Inspecting a Remote

    $ git remote show origin # Lists the URL for the remote as well as the tracking branch information.

> Renaming a remote reference

    $ git remote rename pb paul # Rename from pb to paul

> Tagging [TODO]

> Git Aliases
  
    # you can do git co to checkout stuff
    $ git config --global alias.co checkout
    
    # Combine the unstage and the reset commands to make it easier to unstage things
    $ git config --global alias.unstage ’reset HEAD --’

    # Add last alias to see the last commit easily
    $ git config --global alias.last ’log -1 HEAD’

# 3 Git Branching

## 3.1 What a Branch Is

#### When you commit, Git stores a commit object that contains:
- A pointer to the snapshot of content you created
- Author/message metadata
- Zero or more pointers to the parent of the commit (0 for first, 1 for normal, more for commit from merge)

A branch is a pointer to one of the commits. The default branch name is __`master`__.

A special pointer called `HEAD` keeps track of what branch you are in.

## 3.2 Basic Branching and Merging

> Create a branch and check the branch out, leave it there for the mean time.

    $ git checkout -b iss53
    $ git commit -a -m ’added a new footer [issue 53]’
    $ git checkout master

> Create a branch, make a commit, go back to master, merge the shit

    $ git checkout -b ’hotfix’
    $ git commit -a -m ’fixed the broken email address’
    $ git checkout master
    $ git merge hotfix
    Fast forward

The phrase "fast forward" means that the master branch moved forward into the hotfix branch.

> Once you merged the branches you can delete the hotfix branch.

    $ git branch -d hotfix

Merging: Remove either everything over `====` or under it to `<<<` or `>>>`.

#### Remote branches

Form is `(remote)/(branch)`. So `origin/master`. A pull down automatically names the remote repo `origin` and its branch is named `origin/master` locally, and you can't move it.

#### Pushing

> Push serverfix local to origin:serverfix

    $ git push origin serverfix

> Push serverfix local to origin:awesomebranch

    $ git push serverfix:awesomebranch

#### Tracking Branches

When you clone a repository, it generally automatically creates a `master` branch that tracks `origin/master`. That’s why `git push` and `git pull` work out of the box with no other arguments. However, you can set up other tracking branches if you wish — ones that don’t track branches on origin and don’t track the master branch.

> Get the remote branch and create your own. This creates a local serverfix branch based on the origin/serverfix branch.

    $ git checkout --track origin/serverfix

> Local sf branch based on origin/serverfix

    $ git checkout --track sf origin/serverfix

> Delete remote branch (WTF syntax)

    $ git push [remotename] :[branch]

`merge` vs `rebase`: When merging, you make a three-way thing. When rebasing, you go back to the intersection of the branches and move forward from there. Rebasing is sort of cleaner.

[TODO]

# Git on the Server

# Distributed Git

## 6.3 - Git Tools - Stashing

`git stash`: Takes the dirty state of your working directory, and saves it on a stack of unfinished changes that you can apply at any time.

`$ git stash`: You switch changes but don't want to commit.

`$ git stash list`: Shows stashes.

`$ git stash apply`: Attempts to restore the stash. Stash is not dropped.

`$ git stash drop`: Drop the stash.

Unapplying a stash: Shitstorm.

`$ git stash branch`: Yun.




----------
## [The difference between git pull, git fetch and git clone (and git rebase)](http://blog.mikepearce.net/2010/05/18/the-difference-between-git-pull-git-fetch-and-git-clone-and-git-rebase/)

`git pull`: Pull down a remote from wherever, and instantly merge it into the branch you're in when you make the request. It runs `fetch` and `merge` byt default, or a rebase with `--rebase`.

`git fetch`: Same to pull, but no merging. It creates a local copy of a remote branch which you shouldn't manipulate directly.

`git clone`: Clone a repo into a newly created directory. And it additionally creates a remote called `origin`.

`git rebase`: Pull remote, rewind the local, then replay all the changes one by one.
