social-skills/charisma-on-command.md, before:

## Charisma On Command - The Charismatic Equation to Get People to Like you
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jt1YhYty4L0)

- Charisma is an outward expression of inward thoughts.
- Conviction + energy + presentation.
- "I care more about my character than the opinions of others."
- Energy: positivity, supportiveness, sarcasm. Avoid being mean to people, even in a joking manner. Passionate: don't be bored about things.
- Facial feedback hypothesis: people forced to smile actually feel happier.
- Presentation
  - Us their name and remember it.
  - Make jokes to improve their self-esteem.
  - Give genuine non-reaction seeking compliments.
  - Ask for their opinion.
  - Watch speaker.
  - Watch the audience when speaking.
  - Smile for real (smile with your eyes).
  - Pull your shoulders back.
  - Keep your chin up.
  - Align pelvis properly.
  - Open body language.
  - Use gestures.
  - Touch others to evoke trust.

Tywin Lannister

- Being loud is good for respect but you don't want to overdo it.
- Silence after right people have said something, to make people regret what they said. Flinching and breaking eye contact communicate fear.
- "You will" and the inflection is saying that this is not a question, and this is a command.
- When speaking to employees, sometimes it is better to ask "can you" versus "do this."
- To get people out of a confident state, he makes people wait for him. The purpose is a power signal, saying "we will do things on my time." This has effects on your subconscious.
- He always creates a conversation where he has the last word, so it ends on the terms that he wants to end on.
- Tywin is about strategic shows of force.
- His only flaw: not seeing Tyrion for his talents.

Littlefinger

- Game of Thrones is all about power.
- In the long run it's people who wield it more subtly that win the game.
- He drops a discussion after saying a few points to make the person think of the idea.
- He does not force people to make their decisions. When people agree to what you want because of pressure, they won't stick to it in the long run. People want to make a decision on their own.
- A man with no motive is someone you don't suspect. He is careful to make sure that people with status do not think he is talking over him.
- He does not show outward animosity when people get mad at him.
- While people want the trappings of power, Littlefinger only wants the big wins. He doesn't care about his ego, ex: getting mad because someone called you something.
- He has no issue with lying and he has no obligation to keep pawns alive. For Littlefinger, nothing is sacred so he is not distracted by honor and fairness.
- Littlefinger's weakness is that he let Sansa know about his intentions which is to sit on the Iron Throne.

Tyrion

- Always asks what the person wants.
- Chatting with Bronn: he uses land ("I will be Lord of Winterfell"), gold, pride, and friendship.
- Influence is not about convincing people to want different things than they already want.
- It's about showing them that the way to get what they want is by following you.
- There is almost always a way to get more for both of you.
- Understand people's motivations and show them how you can help.

## Why Daenerys Loves Jon Snow
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NzdMrTRplLg)

- Daario Naharis: Penchant for taking risks and coming out on top.
- It is attractive if they can keep a playful attitude when it is a serious matter.
- Poking fun at yourself at the right time.
- Playfulness in the face of risk = confidence.
- Playfully persistent: rejection is no big deal to him.
- Confidence isn't about knowing that everything will work out, the root of confidence is believing that no matter what happens, it will be okay.
- "No big deal."
- Daario gives his honest opinion: if you do it in a non-petty and respectful way, it can lead to attraction.
- Daenerys leaving Daario because he is missing something.
- Jon re: risks: touching the dragon, and not bending the knee. Btw he is not as charming as Daario.
- Jon has standards--he knows she is beautiful, but until he sees her have a perform an act of sacrifice (dragon getting hit by White Walker). He does not bend the knee to her looks or to her power, but to her character.
- We love people who have a mission that is bigger than themselves and we love people who inspire us to be more though their example.
- When Daenerys sees what Jon is willing to give for everyone else (his scars from the stabbing), she falls in love with him.
- The reason why they care for each other is that they have high standards and they know that the other lives for more than themselves.

## 3 Easy Ways to Start A Conversation With Anyone
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cbyc7mscFlA)

- Human Twitter: Voice internal questions. The power of this is that we can ask people around us for things.
  - Moving somewhere: "If you got here, where would you go?"
  - Hear someone speaking a foreign language: "Where are you from?"
  - Ask them how they feel: "how do you feel about the fight" or "what are your impressions of Santa Monica".
- Human Twitter: Voice Internal Commentary.
  - "A cowboy just walked into a bar." The point in this is that you're not coming in with a pre-planned line.
  - When you get to the feeling part, that's when you get into a conversation.
- When you're expected to be social, do the "hey, I don't think I've met you yet, my name is so-and-so." It shows that you know you're supposed to meet people, and it shows that you know some social skills.

## How To Never Run Out Of Things To Say In Conversation
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QXiAPiw7vfc)
- You know, that reminds me of something...
- Open-ended conversations/why?
- Revival questions: So how do you guys know one another? So whats your story? This is a super open-ended question. Or: "Any future plans?"
- A question that is sort of a compliment. "You look like someone who is strong."
- Flip the script/be silent for a while, allow them to think of something while being silent yourself.

## 9 Mistakes That Kill Your Charisma
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R20DrhsdJaQ)

- No proactively introducing themself: No Hi, I'm Daryll. Make eye contact and introduce yourself to everyone.
- Not introducing your friends when you are in a new group.
- Talking about things that no one cares about.
- Not soliciting feedback: people should be able to ask questions. So you want to know if this is a good topic of not.
- Trailing off mid-sentence. Speak in a full and clear voice.
- Replying with short answers.
- Whining.
- Not remembering names.
- Lacking principles. It's the people that have convictions that generate the most respect and are the most charismatic.

## How To Make People Like You - Bruce Lee Charisma Breakdown
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k7DlYzODWmo)

- Genuine smile. You need to radiate positivity. The muscular tension around the eyes.
- Repeat back the words that you heard.
- Affirming one another. "I agree with you..."
- Correcting someone with a smile on your face. You can have a positive and a negative show of communication.
- The more you get all components to sync with each other, then it is easier for them to show rapport. You want to have rapport between everything in yourself too.

## How To NEVER Be Boring
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JxZY3d7kw0)

- Improve your energy which will always help personal development and relationships
- Make backup list of topics as second tip on how to never be boring
- Learning to tell a good story as a self help in social will aid in self improvement too
- Spend part of your every day pursuing a dream on the philosophy side
- Unusual, high status, involves her.

## Body Language Tips To Instantly Look More Attractive
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rXnrq3L2N0)

- Be expressive. Motion creates emotion. When you walk around stooped, you will feel more shy.
- Have magnetic language. The fun is where you are. We tend to know what the fun is and it's about facing the person you're speaking with. Have fun with whoever is near to you. Don't look and act and behave as if the fun is out there. Have fun where you are nearby.
- When groups go out: try to stagger them. It looks funny because it's true, but that will change the dynamic of the group. You will look more attractive because it looks like you're setting it up.
- Smiling!

Commit message:

Charisma on Command, Tai Lopez.

social-skills/charisma-on-command.md, after:

# Charisma On Command - The Charismatic Equation to Get People to Like you
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jt1YhYty4L0)

- Charisma is an outward expression of inward thoughts.
- Conviction + energy + presentation.
- "I care more about my character than the opinions of others."
- Energy: positivity, supportiveness, sarcasm. Avoid being mean to people, even in a joking manner. Passionate: don't be bored about things.
- Facial feedback hypothesis: people forced to smile actually feel happier.
- Presentation
  - Us their name and remember it.
  - Make jokes to improve their self-esteem.
  - Give genuine non-reaction seeking compliments.
  - Ask for their opinion.
  - Watch speaker.
  - Watch the audience when speaking.
  - Smile for real (smile with your eyes).
  - Pull your shoulders back.
  - Keep your chin up.
  - Align pelvis properly.
  - Open body language.
  - Use gestures.
  - Touch others to evoke trust.

Tywin Lannister

- Being loud is good for respect but you don't want to overdo it.
- Silence after right people have said something, to make people regret what they said. Flinching and breaking eye contact communicate fear.
- "You will" and the inflection is saying that this is not a question, and this is a command.
- When speaking to employees, sometimes it is better to ask "can you" versus "do this."
- To get people out of a confident state, he makes people wait for him. The purpose is a power signal, saying "we will do things on my time." This has effects on your subconscious.
- He always creates a conversation where he has the last word, so it ends on the terms that he wants to end on.
- Tywin is about strategic shows of force.
- His only flaw: not seeing Tyrion for his talents.

Littlefinger

- Game of Thrones is all about power.
- In the long run it's people who wield it more subtly that win the game.
- He drops a discussion after saying a few points to make the person think of the idea.
- He does not force people to make their decisions. When people agree to what you want because of pressure, they won't stick to it in the long run. People want to make a decision on their own.
- A man with no motive is someone you don't suspect. He is careful to make sure that people with status do not think he is talking over him.
- He does not show outward animosity when people get mad at him.
- While people want the trappings of power, Littlefinger only wants the big wins. He doesn't care about his ego, ex: getting mad because someone called you something.
- He has no issue with lying and he has no obligation to keep pawns alive. For Littlefinger, nothing is sacred so he is not distracted by honor and fairness.
- Littlefinger's weakness is that he let Sansa know about his intentions which is to sit on the Iron Throne.

Tyrion

- Always asks what the person wants.
- Chatting with Bronn: he uses land ("I will be Lord of Winterfell"), gold, pride, and friendship.
- Influence is not about convincing people to want different things than they already want.
- It's about showing them that the way to get what they want is by following you.
- There is almost always a way to get more for both of you.
- Understand people's motivations and show them how you can help.

# Why Daenerys Loves Jon Snow
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NzdMrTRplLg)

- Daario Naharis: Penchant for taking risks and coming out on top.
- It is attractive if they can keep a playful attitude when it is a serious matter.
- Poking fun at yourself at the right time.
- Playfulness in the face of risk = confidence.
- Playfully persistent: rejection is no big deal to him.
- Confidence isn't about knowing that everything will work out, the root of confidence is believing that no matter what happens, it will be okay.
- "No big deal."
- Daario gives his honest opinion: if you do it in a non-petty and respectful way, it can lead to attraction.
- Daenerys leaving Daario because he is missing something.
- Jon re: risks: touching the dragon, and not bending the knee. Btw he is not as charming as Daario.
- Jon has standards--he knows she is beautiful, but until he sees her have a perform an act of sacrifice (dragon getting hit by White Walker). He does not bend the knee to her looks or to her power, but to her character.
- We love people who have a mission that is bigger than themselves and we love people who inspire us to be more though their example.
- When Daenerys sees what Jon is willing to give for everyone else (his scars from the stabbing), she falls in love with him.
- The reason why they care for each other is that they have high standards and they know that the other lives for more than themselves.

# 3 Easy Ways to Start A Conversation With Anyone
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cbyc7mscFlA)

- Human Twitter: Voice internal questions. The power of this is that we can ask people around us for things.
  - Moving somewhere: "If you got here, where would you go?"
  - Hear someone speaking a foreign language: "Where are you from?"
  - Ask them how they feel: "how do you feel about the fight" or "what are your impressions of Santa Monica".
- Human Twitter: Voice Internal Commentary.
  - "A cowboy just walked into a bar." The point in this is that you're not coming in with a pre-planned line.
  - When you get to the feeling part, that's when you get into a conversation.
- When you're expected to be social, do the "hey, I don't think I've met you yet, my name is so-and-so." It shows that you know you're supposed to meet people, and it shows that you know some social skills.

# How To Never Run Out Of Things To Say In Conversation
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QXiAPiw7vfc)
- You know, that reminds me of something...
- Open-ended conversations/why?
- Revival questions: So how do you guys know one another? So whats your story? This is a super open-ended question. Or: "Any future plans?"
- A question that is sort of a compliment. "You look like someone who is strong."
- Flip the script/be silent for a while, allow them to think of something while being silent yourself.

# 9 Mistakes That Kill Your Charisma
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R20DrhsdJaQ)

- No proactively introducing themself: No Hi, I'm Daryll. Make eye contact and introduce yourself to everyone.
- Not introducing your friends when you are in a new group.
- Talking about things that no one cares about.
- Not soliciting feedback: people should be able to ask questions. So you want to know if this is a good topic of not.
- Trailing off mid-sentence. Speak in a full and clear voice.
- Replying with short answers.
- Whining.
- Not remembering names.
- Lacking principles. It's the people that have convictions that generate the most respect and are the most charismatic.

# How To Make People Like You - Bruce Lee Charisma Breakdown
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k7DlYzODWmo)

- Genuine smile. You need to radiate positivity. The muscular tension around the eyes.
- Repeat back the words that you heard.
- Affirming one another. "I agree with you..."
- Correcting someone with a smile on your face. You can have a positive and a negative show of communication.
- The more you get all components to sync with each other, then it is easier for them to show rapport. You want to have rapport between everything in yourself too.

# How To NEVER Be Boring
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JxZY3d7kw0)

- Improve your energy which will always help personal development and relationships
- Make backup list of topics as second tip on how to never be boring
- Learning to tell a good story as a self help in social will aid in self improvement too
- Spend part of your every day pursuing a dream on the philosophy side
- Unusual, high status, involves her.

# Body Language Tips To Instantly Look More Attractive
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rXnrq3L2N0)

- Be expressive. Motion creates emotion. When you walk around stooped, you will feel more shy.
- Have magnetic language. The fun is where you are. We tend to know what the fun is and it's about facing the person you're speaking with. Have fun with whoever is near to you. Don't look and act and behave as if the fun is out there. Have fun where you are nearby.
- When groups go out: try to stagger them. It looks funny because it's true, but that will change the dynamic of the group. You will look more attractive because it looks like you're setting it up.
- Smiling!

# Tai Lopez
[Reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ub_cGEzAUTo)

- Something is working here.
- Production quality: iPhone and shoot from the hand. This creates a level of authenticity and trust. High production = authoritative.
- Authority: Hollywood Hills, Ted X, Lamborghini, books. Then, ground in relatable past. "I had 47 bucks once."
- The mechanism: do not introduce the mechanism until after you've established the authority. Mentioning objections, "Don't worry about this if you're a cynic." "Warning, only buy this persuasion course if you are a good person" lol.
- Call to action multiple times: It's free, it's quick. It becomes a "you have more to lose by not clicking than clicking".
- Don't ask for big commitments, just do small asks first (lunch, coffee).
- You're involved in marketing, no matter what you do.
