social-skills/reddit-social-skills.md, before:

# How to stop being the guy that rarely says anything?
[link](http://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/14j3y2/how_to_stop_being_the_guy_that_rarely_says/)

Everywhere you go, whether it be the bathroom or an important meeting, always walk like you're going somewhere important. When I started focusing on walking with purpose, at first it felt really stupid. Then, people started wanting to walk with me, for no real reason.

I tried to imagine that I was carrying something really important, since I was usually carrying a book to class. I'd switch it up every once in a while to keep it feeling important. *Like one day I imagineds I was on my way to turn in an essay I spent the last 3 weeks pouring my sould into. I know this essay is badass and the teacher is going to love it. You don't dump your heart into something like that and just shlop it onto the pile of other papers. You place it down with pride.*

The Book of the Five Rings.

People are really attracted to confidence, like the confidence will rub off on them or something. Work it. I faked it so long that I have a ton of real confidence now. *I still don't talk any more than I used to, but when I do, people listen because I speak with the confidence that my thoughts are worthy of their attention.*

I always have major issues fully understanding or being able to do what I'm learning at the moment, but by the end of the next semester, I look back and realize that I actually do know how to do it, and it's easy now.

Look people in the eye. Don't look down while walking. Don't be wishy-washy when it comes to making simple unimportant choices, just pick something. Don't let people see that you're surprised or flustered by something unexpected. Sit back and look at everybody in meetings, but especially the one who is talking. Remember that your needs, desires, and opinions are just as valid as the next person's needs, desires, and opinions.

When you're really unsure of what to say or do, ask the other person, "What do you think we should do?" and listen, but ask as if you have an idea, but you want their opinion, too.

If I'm having trouble making conversation, FORD. Family, Occupation, Recreation, and Dreams.

# Former shy here, I recently did a 30-day social experiment
[link](http://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/1hv1ut/former_shy_here_i_recently_did_a_30day_social/)

1. Pursue your passions. Of all the people I met, the ones I vibed with best were those that I had a mutual interest with from the beginning (CrossFit, swing dancing, hanging out in coffee shops). Building friendships takes consistent effort. It takes work. *That work can be made easier by going out and doing whatever it is you love most, or going out and trying a new hobby.* Do this enough and your world will become smaller and smaller, as the more you put yourself out into the community, the more you will begin to see the same people.
2. Hot and unbothered. 99% of the people I talked to were extremely polite back: people in general are nicer than we give them credit for. The people who ignored me were probably not worth my time trying to get to know anyway.
3. Suick on the draw. If someone starts a conversation, they won't come off as anti-social, socially awkward, whatever. Waiting not only rifles every excuse a person can think of, but it also shows that the person isn't confident of themselves.
4. Lonely socialites. *A high percentage of people wished they were more social.* Many people want to be more social, too.
4. Everyone and their brother. Talking to everyone will make you happier, make you smarter, make you more confident, get you more friends, get you more dates, get you a better job, and make you see that the people of this world are inherently good.

Commit message:

Finish the social skills thingie I saw.

social-skills/reddit-social-skills.md, after:

# How to stop being the guy that rarely says anything?
[link](http://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/14j3y2/how_to_stop_being_the_guy_that_rarely_says/)

Everywhere you go, whether it be the bathroom or an important meeting, always walk like you're going somewhere important. When I started focusing on walking with purpose, at first it felt really stupid. Then, people started wanting to walk with me, for no real reason.

I tried to imagine that I was carrying something really important, since I was usually carrying a book to class. I'd switch it up every once in a while to keep it feeling important. *Like one day I imagineds I was on my way to turn in an essay I spent the last 3 weeks pouring my sould into. I know this essay is badass and the teacher is going to love it. You don't dump your heart into something like that and just shlop it onto the pile of other papers. You place it down with pride.*

The Book of the Five Rings.

People are really attracted to confidence, like the confidence will rub off on them or something. Work it. I faked it so long that I have a ton of real confidence now. *I still don't talk any more than I used to, but when I do, people listen because I speak with the confidence that my thoughts are worthy of their attention.*

I always have major issues fully understanding or being able to do what I'm learning at the moment, but by the end of the next semester, I look back and realize that I actually do know how to do it, and it's easy now.

Look people in the eye. Don't look down while walking. Don't be wishy-washy when it comes to making simple unimportant choices, just pick something. Don't let people see that you're surprised or flustered by something unexpected. Sit back and look at everybody in meetings, but especially the one who is talking. Remember that your needs, desires, and opinions are just as valid as the next person's needs, desires, and opinions.

When you're really unsure of what to say or do, ask the other person, "What do you think we should do?" and listen, but ask as if you have an idea, but you want their opinion, too.

If I'm having trouble making conversation, FORD. Family, Occupation, Recreation, and Dreams.

# Former shy here, I recently did a 30-day social experiment
[link](http://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/1hv1ut/former_shy_here_i_recently_did_a_30day_social/)

1. Pursue your passions. Of all the people I met, the ones I vibed with best were those that I had a mutual interest with from the beginning (CrossFit, swing dancing, hanging out in coffee shops). Building friendships takes consistent effort. It takes work. *That work can be made easier by going out and doing whatever it is you love most, or going out and trying a new hobby.* Do this enough and your world will become smaller and smaller, as the more you put yourself out into the community, the more you will begin to see the same people.
2. Hot and unbothered. 99% of the people I talked to were extremely polite back: people in general are nicer than we give them credit for. The people who ignored me were probably not worth my time trying to get to know anyway.
3. Quick on the draw. If someone starts a conversation, they won't come off as anti-social, socially awkward, whatever. Waiting not only rifles every excuse a person can think of, but it also shows that the person isn't confident of themselves.
4. Lonely socialites. *A high percentage of people wished they were more social.* Many people want to be more social, too.
4. Everyone and their brother. Talking to everyone will make you happier, make you smarter, make you more confident, get you more friends, get you more dates, get you a better job, and make you see that the people of this world are inherently good.

The most surprising thing about this challenge was how hard it wasn't. My daily habits didn't change that much from what I had been doing the past couple of years. There are many opportunities in a day to meet new people. I had a lot of quality conversations with people such as waitresses, bartenders, and hotel staff. It was hardest when I was tired and when I still needed to talk to new people.

Micromomentum (on a day to day basis) and macromomentum (overall change after the thing). Micro was very observable, and macro was also observable.  *It was always easy to not introduce myself to someone new to the gym because I knew I'd see them plenty from then on out, but it felt good to be that super-friendly and welcoming person. "More social" is relative and hard to quantify, but when the reaction time in starting conversations becomes shorter, things rarely get awkward.*

Openers: "I'm Andrew", observational openers about what is happening, situational starters such as "so are you guys studying or working" etc. Meetup.com is nice for expanding one's social circle. *Friendships = chemistry + consistent interaction over time.*

Overall, I think forcing yourself to talk to strangers is an expressway for developing yourself into a better person. It's one of the quickest ways to gain confidence in yourself, and makes you realize that you aren't on the "outside looking in" and that everyone else doesn't possess some sort of "social secret" that you aren't being let on. As I have learned recently, a lot of people fear being in social situations where they don't know anyone and feel that their social skills are lacking.


However, unless you are lucky enough to work from home and can sometimes get through days without ever leaving your own walls, I don't know if going out and forcing conversation with random people in grocery stores is completely necessary to become better at socializing and expanding your social circle. Again, cashiers are a gold mine for small-talk practice, and probably what got me to finally bust out of my shell a few years ago. They have to be nice to you, and if things are awkward you probably won't ever see them again. And as a former employee in the service sector, I appreciated few things more than a customer that would break me out my mindless routine and treat me like an actual person.
