## What screams "I am an emotionally healthy and well-adjusted individual"?
[Reference](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/6qx0qe/what_screams_i_am_an_emotionally_healthy_and/)

- What I noticed was she was cool and legitimately happy with other people's achievements and success. I was not. I always thought I was, but whenever I was in a tough situation in life, seeing other people achieve something good made me sad inside. I never showed it so nobody had ever noticed until she called me out on it. That's when I realized if you are emotionally well-adjusted in life and happy with who you are, not only you wont care what your friends achieve and were they are standing in life, you'd genuinely be happy for them.
  - I still struggle with this. It's specifically only "undeserved" success that bothers me though. If someone works hard and succeeds that's great. If they slack off and luck into something I can't be happy for them.
  - It seems weird you wouldn't be happy for them when your issue isn't with what they are doing, but what you aren't. It sounds like you are resenting them for showing it's possible, yet what they are doing doesn't really affect you directly. If dropping everything and moving across the country is something you really want to do, you shouldn't blame them for you not doing it.
  - Take a step back. There is an element of luck to everyone's achievements, even if it's just the negative kind (lucky to not have been run over by a tram before achieving X). Don't begrudge people their luck.
- Bad shit happens to them and they're bothered by it, but then roll with it and continue along their journey. A balance between being affected by your day to day life but not letting it divert your life's journey.
  - I'd like to think this applies to me, but it's less well adjusted, and more believing that no matter what happens, I will find a way to survive. It's amazing what you can do when pride is not in the equation.
  - "Damaged people are dangerous; they know they can survive." It's not just humility, but the awareness that life continues after loss that fuels survival. A true belief in survival means you don't fear change, and that's all there is to being well-adjusted: accepting and adapting.
  - Someone who can get through tragedy without losing optimism is a myth. It's more about being able to accept that something bad happened to you and accepting the reality of things and moving forward without the emotional weight of it still clinging to you. And that happens when you have a support system, are able to ask for and accept help, and confront the tragedy head on. All critical factors to healing and growth.
  - There's a pile of awful things and a pile of good things and they don't really affect each other. The bad doesn't spoil the good and the good doesn't excuse the bad. They just are what they are. I'll get more of both. So will you. So will everyone.
  - At the time, though, I spoke with my father and his advice was about the same - his best friend died when they were young teens. To this day, he still thinks "oh man, he'd love this! I should show it to him, oh yeah. Right." He recently turned 65 and has done lots of things in his life he should be proud of (or at the very least, I and many others respect him for accomplishing), and this is all in spite of the lingering memory of his friend that will never go away.
  - At the time back then, it was horrifying to hear that the pain never leaves and you just have to shoulder it for the rest of your life.
  - They are just talking out of their ass. When life really hits you hard, you fall to the ground, then try to get back up hard. It is not emotional stability if you go on your way like nothing happened, it actually means quite the opposite that you have no idea what you are going through.
  - Also, I try to remind myself of the big picture when I'm in stressful situations. When gauging importance of current situation, how much will this matter to me in one week, year, 3 years, 5 years 10+ from now? You can overcome nearly any situation and remain focused and strong with the right frame of mind.
  - "We'll (I'll) figure it out" is my mantra for this kind of shit.
  - Thank you. In one week I lost my job, my kitty died, and my car keys got stolen.  I just kept living my life. Cried some, yeah. But I threw out applications, bought new car keys and this weekend I'm going to think about new cats. Fucking sucks but being upset isn't going to fix anything.
- Being able to laugh at yourself.
- If you're willing to admit when you're wrong, or when you're not good at something, you're probably doing okay.
  - But without being too self-deprecating. Some people put themselves down and list their weaknesses all day long and that screams insecurity.
- Receiving constructive criticism graciously and appropriately.
- They can deal with stress without panicking or freaking out.
  - Pressure makes diamonds. Reminds me of the interview with 50 cent, and they asked him about how it must be stressful doing all these big meeting/deals with big music companies as hes not used to it and he just laughed and said something like " nah its easy , I'm used to deals with scary people who will kill you if you fuck up , sometimes even if you do everything right , so this is fun compared to that" or something of that effect.
- Doing the boring stuff of life like going to the dentist/doctor, maintaining you possessions (regular oil changes if you have a car, keeping your things clean), and building healthy social bonds. When you are depressed none of this feels like it matters, and the lack of care only pulls you down further.
  - You're right. Lucky me, no one looks at me doing the house chores half drunk at 3 am.
- Strong principles but flexible opinions. Calm in debate and stressful situations. Does not give a fuck a about how other people live their lives.
- My SO is incredibly calm and great at defusing tense situations.
  - He's really good at keeping his voice moderated. If someone yells, he doesn't yell back, he keeps his voice calm and nonthreatening. I think this is also why animals love him; he doesn't baby-talk to them, but he keeps a low-key and warm tone to his voice.
  - He makes "positive" statements instead of "negative" ones, if that makes any sense. Like, instead of saying, "stop getting so angry", he'll say, "hey, man, what's going on here? Let's talk about this". It's subtly less argumentative and people seem a lot more willing to go along with it.
  - He's good at seeming genuinely interested in what someone is telling him, even if they're making no sense or being aggressive. A lot of times, someone who's being a douche will only get douchier if they feel like they aren't being taken seriously. Feeling like someone is actually listening often takes the wind out of their sails somewhat.
  - He's proactive about this stuff. If he notices someone starting to act up, he addresses it before it becomes a full-blown crisis, usually by just walking over and introducing himself.
- Not caring what other people are doing. You like rap? Cool. You like Jazz, great? You're married at 18? Congratulations. You're sleeping around and partying at 35? Sounds fun, dude. You're a high powered manager? Sounds interesting, what's your favourite part of it. You're a writer? Sounds interesting, what's your favourite part? You work in McDonalds... I think we're getting the hang of this, eh, same question. When what they're doing for work isn't the important part, the important part is that they enjoy what they do. The ultimate sign of having your shit together, is not having to live your life through other people's drama, nor judging them for their choices, but instead just being nice to people.
- The person has a job, friends, a place to live and doesn't post a lot on social media.
  - No, it doesn't necessarily exclude you, however most people I know (younger generation) utilize social media as more of self validation rather than truly sharing and connecting with friends, which was its original purpose to begin with.
- Stable employment history, with appropriately moving on when skillsets increase or change.
- Non-Constant stream of relationships, OTOH ending relationships when they've run their course or are no longer healthy even if the relationship doesn't get the bragging rights of being "long term"
- Not afraid of being alone, but at the same time doesn't completely shun social interaction.
