# Unlearn Your MBA

But before you can even get started, I think the most important thing for you to realize is that you have to unlearn your MBA. And I'm treating MBA here as a sort of a general grab bag for business school management theories and I think that's probably as kind as I can put it. I spent three years at Copenhagen Business School. I will probably say that, according to my estimation 96.7% of the time was completely wasted. It has nothing to do with what I actually do today and it has no impact on what I actually work with everyday. In fact, I came out slightly damaged. I came out with a head that been soaking in management theory for three years and it was actually a little off. It was not very well-suited for the real world of just building a product, pleasing customers and making profits as a business because that's really not what you learn. And you just have to just readjust and recalibrate when you come out of school to that reality that nobody cares about a 20 page report on five forces. It just doesn't matter. There's none of your customers that's going to think, "Oh. Well, did you do your five forces for this setup? No. All right, then we're not going to buy your product." It just doesn't matter. So, all of these tools that you've learned are only for you. They're not going to impress anybody else when you start your own business. And what you learn is that when you're starting your own business and all businesses start small, is that none of it is relevant. When you have two people, three people, five people, nobody is going to do all the heavy-handed management theory on it. It's just irrelevant because it's not targeted to your size. That might be fine for a management retreat at IBM's second level management somewhere in Florida. Like that's going to impress the rest of the group I'm sure, but it's not going to impress any of your customers. 

I tell you the second biggest thing is probably realizing that planning is guessing.  What? You don't even have anything yet and you're theorizing about how it's going to look in year five? That sort of long term planning is fine again for big stable corporations. When you're starting your own business, especially if you're trying to do anything new, if you're trying to do anything in a new industry or if you're trying to tear up existing industries, or come up with something else that's not already there, you have no clue. And the sooner you realize that the better because planning is not just guessing, it's harmful guessing because it's a waste of time. All the time you spent doing your five year plans, you could worry about tomorrow. 

We absolutely do not worry about what next year is going to look like because it has very little impact on what we do today. So, realize that most planning is guessing. And that's putting it 'friendly'. The guessing usually leads to a whole lot of other crap around it that comes up and wastes your time and sucks your energy away from worrying about what you really need to be worrying about which is today and tomorrow and next week. All right. And final thing of that is realizing that most decisions in a small business are incredibly temporary. 

When you're starting out on your own, with your own ideas, with your own sweat and blood, the vast majority of all decisions are temporary. And what matters most is starting. It doesn't really matter what the decision is as long as there is one. Just get going. 

Venture capital is a time bomb. And realize first of all I'm talking about here is I'm talking from my experiences. I build software. Again, I don't build factories in India that cost a billion dollars. I don't have all this infrastructure cost. I don't need any of all that ramp up. I'm talking about software, Web 2.0, blah blah blah blah. In this industry, venture capital is absolutely a time bomb and it's probably the most harmful thing you can do to a new business, is to accept venture capital upfront and I'll tell you why. At first, it sounds like it's a really good idea. If I didn't take venture capital, well, I wouldn't have any money and we would only be us three people and we would actually like, "How are we going to live?" Good question. Now, if you take venture capital, you got millions. You probably got a runway of years. You don't have to worry about tomorrow. You can worry about three years from now because tomorrow doesn't really matter. You have $5 million in the bank. Who cares? Even better. It's not your money. You get to spend other people's money for a sustained period of time and the worst that can happen is that you waste five years of your life. That's pretty bad. Wasting five years on your life on something that doesn't work because the time bomb blew up. That's a lot worse than worrying about how you're going to make rent next week, in my mind. So, the tradeoff is sort of, are you going to have the pain now when you actually have to prove that your idea is good enough that it can be profitable and that it can be self sustainable? Or are you going to have the pain five years from now when you realize that the time bomb blew up. Now, the venture capitals own your company and they've just pushed you out and you have nothing to show for five years of effort. That's sort of the worst case scenario. But it happens a lot more often than you'd think. I've been talking to a bunch of entrepreneurs in the Web 2.0 space. A lot of them took venture capital. I have not meet a single one who wouldn't say he would do it differently if he had to start out with today. But there's not a lot of information out there about that because the problem is once you take your series A round of funding, you're an addict. You're going to need that next fix. You're going to need series B right now. "We need some bridge capital to get it over just to the other side". And when you're in that situation and you're an addict, it's a pretty bad idea to piss off your dealer by saying, "I should never have gotten into this in the first place. I'm so sorry." No, doesn't really work. So, big warning label on venture capital. 

I think the key problem with venture capital is first of all, you're spending other people's money. When you're spending other people's money, you care much, much less about said money. When we're hiring a new person at 37signals, I'm spending my money. Do you think I care then about which person I'm going to hire? Do you think I'm just going to hire some bozo just to fill up the org chart or to impress somebody else, the press? No. That's not worth 120 grand. Secondly, when it's your own money, you want to make more of it faster which usually means that you can't just put out a product, a product that doesn't have a price. Nobody cares. You need to have an actual product that has an actual price so you can make actual profits. The worst thing for business is when you have no constraints, when you just have as long as the timeline as those five million will carry you. You're going to make a lot of terrible, terrible decisions. And you're going to waste a lot of time on stuff that just doesn't matter because you don't have that sense of urgency. The urgency you get from spending your own money and earning your own money is the most powerful driving force for an entrepreneur. 

Small is what you go through to get to the major leagues. Most VCs who invest are not going to be happy with the business that throws off a million dollars a year in cash flow, if that's sort of the scope of the business. The fact of the matter is a million dollars is a lot of money when it goes straight into your bank account. So, if you can build a small business that only makes you a few million dollars a year, you're doing pretty damn well. Trying to get a $2 million a year business, a $1 million a year business, half a million dollar a year business, it's more akin to being a fairly skilled poker player and going to a table. You have a chance. You're not just relying on the buy-out lottery. You're not just relying on the fact that the Google gods will favor you and buy you for X million dollars. So, I think you're much better off trying to build a small business. And the fact is that most big businesses started as small businesses. There are a few business that go from nothing to everything in 18 months. But the problem is that there's just enough that we believe the story. There's just enough YouTubes and whatever else that gets that trajectory. Which is also just enough that all the VCs get all sharky and want get in on that action, like of course, who would want to invest $50,000 and get $200 million back? If it didn't work out or blow up their time bomb will reach its durational blow up. No skin off our game." Skin off all those 19 guys game. Skin of all the game in time that they lost and they wasted and the missing dent that they didn't put into the universe. ({

Finally, there's tragic misconception that if you start a new business by yourself, you have to be workaholic. Our main product, our flagship product Basecamp was build off me spending 10 hours per week while still in school. And that is today, by far still our main revenue generator and made us millions and millions of dollars. Based off me, 10 hours per week, a few designers as well for six months. This 80 hours a week bull, because the problem is when you work 80 hours a week, you're just a rabbit. You're just running around trying to do everything you need to do to get your business going, without realizing what it is that actually matters. And usually about 5 to 10% of the effort you actually put in matters. When you put it 80 hours of really hard labor, it's the 3, 5, 10 hours of actual stuff that ends up mattering. Being a workaholic is by no means either a guarantee of success or a requirement. I think there's just a lot of misconception out there about how hard you must work. I'm sure this was true in the industrial age when you were hammering on stuff. If you hammered for another five hours, you would produce another 10 widgets and you can sell those widgets. If you're working in stuff like software or anything else that doesn't require your personal labor in manufacturing widgets which is basically none. None of this stuff matters. The great idea matters. The less execution matters. And all of these great ideas and less execution comes from a well-rested mind. It sorts of goes into the trophy that a lot of people bear. I only sleep four hours a night. And you hear a lot of entrepreneurs bragging about how little they sleep which is about the stupidest thing you can do. Like I'm bragging about how incompetent my performance is going to be when I can't stay awake tomorrow for this thing. Or a programmer, how many bugs I'm going to introduce in the system tomorrow? Like, what? That's a direct correlation. When you're not well rested, your mind is not working at peak performance. You're going to produce [worthless stuff]. And it's just not a factor of 10% [worthless stuff]. It's not like if you sleep half, your stuff is going to be half as good. No, it's going to be 100th as good. So, that doesn't work. 

I'm going to work 30 hours a week or as I had when we're building Basecamp, "I'm going to work 10 hours a week." You have no choice but to underdo your competition. You are not going to out-effort Microsoft or Google. You're not going to be able to put in more programming hours than they are. Thus, you don't go head-to-head with them because there's no need. It just doesn't work. It doesn't work to go head-to-head with somebody who has a million X more than you do. You are going to lose. So, the sooner you realize this, the sooner you realize this, you realize that the constraints are your friend because the constraints force you to do way less and different than your competition. You can't just build a me-too product on 10 hours a week. That's not going to work. We were not going to build a better Word. That was just not going to work. We would have to pick a new category, a new type of product, something that combines something else, something that was vastly different. Different enough that we could do it in the time that we have and it would be simpler than everything else. The number one feedback we have, whenever we do customer service and we've been doing this for five years is that "We love how simple your product is. 

I think that there is no inherent correlation between revenues and employee count. There's no inherent correlation between number of stupid policies and revenue growth. But yet it seems like there is because a lot of big companies work in really silly ways. And people think that, "Well, I guess I got to be that. I guess I got to do the meeting thing and hire the business development guy", and all this other chrome that most businesses, in my mind, do not need but think they need to get there. We're serving, over three million people have been using our products. We're 15 people. There's no way you can get that without being scalable. I think exactly the point is you should build something scalable and scalable in my mind means that there's not a direct correlation. You don't add another $500,000 in revenue and then you have to hire two guys. That to my opinion is not a scalable business. I want it to be disconnected. I want to be able to add another $5 million dollars in revenue and not hire anybody. And that's how we're trying to design our business, that there doesn't have to be a correlation between these things. There doesn't have to be a correlation between the structure and your revenues. 

And the fact is, that when you're starting out, and again, the assumption here, you're working for your own money, you cannot outspend. You can't outspend a development. You can't outspend on marketing either. The only way we know of how to do this is Kathy Sierra which is somebody you always should get familiar with. She wrote a wonderful blog called Creating Passionate Users. She has this wonderful saying of you can either outspend or you can out-teach. We're trying to out-teach because that's what we can do with our resources. We can share the inner workings of how the company runs, how we're building our products, what technology we're using, and we can use all of these things to build an audience. And that's I think a key part of the success of the company is that we're trying to build an audience. We're not just trying to have customers. We're not just trying to push something on people: "Buy this product. Buy this product. Buy this product." We're trying to build an audience that might not need our product today. We have plenty of readers of our weblog or users of Ruby on Rails that doesn't pay us a dime today. At some point, these people will either need it themselves or they will recommend it to other people. I think all sustainable businesses are build by word-of-mouth, in the end. And the way to get to great word-of-mouth is, you can try the outspend approach on marketing and that might work for some. It's very expensive. It's not going to work without the VC capital and that has its own time-bomb issues. So, what can work for you is to try to out-teach. And this is one of those things where it's just not about money. It's just about sharing what it is that you're doing, being a good writer, getting people interested and impassioned about what's going on. And people constantly saying, "Well, I'm working in some other business that's not interesting." Bull. Every business is interesting. There's always somebody who cares. There's always somebody who cares about your niche. If you said, "Who's going to care about how HTML or CSS looks like?" Well, that sounds like a stupid question but there's plenty of people who do. Plenty of people who care. 

Most of the talks we have were about how to pitch to a VC, not about how to be business viable, asides from selling to Google.

First, have a price. You have customers, they have money, then you got profit. Somehow, the notion got lost, we want the VC thingie just like in the 2000s. I think there is a simpler way to build a sustainable business, and at 37signals, the model is we have software and we have a recurring payment. Ex: Campaign Monitor. You use a service, they make money off of it. Fogbuz, they sell the software and you can install it on the server.

You don't have to be a fucking genius to get this. If you have a good idea, you build your application and get profit. It's still hard. The problem though of you making the next FB or YT is tiny. But making something that people like, it's not too shabby (it's still hard do). Compare the probability of the 1 in 10 chance to get 1M. This is a lot of money already! I encourage people to take the better odds rather than the billion dollars.

So let's take the idea of a subscription service, $40/month, 2000 customers, $1M per year. It's hard, but it's not as hard as the Facebook/MySpace. What do you need to get those 2000 customers? Aim for the x signups a day. So you can just look for the tiny niches, you don't need to solve the Next Big Thing, you just have to solve a problem better than the other guys. Not the super best, but just better than everyone else.

Getting the consumer to pay you something, that's pretty hard. Consumers are usually fleeting. It's hard to establish a business for consumers. Going to the consumer shouldn't be a choice. We are going to sell not to the Fortune 500, or to consumers but to the Fortune 5 million. The problem with all of this is the notion of "making a lifestyle business", and you'll make a mom and pop store, which is supposed to be bad? The thing though is that being able to run your own business, without taking VC money, can be really, really satisfying. Calling the shots and doing stuff at your own pace, that is pretty alright. Things are better because you aren't told what to do by other people.

Once you reach a certain point, everything beyond that is just not that important. If you get to the billion, you give up tons of things that you don't want considering. Why would you want to give up something that you enjoy building on? Most startup people are focused on pump it out, then sell out, then live the good life. There could be tons of companies out there solving things, not that big.

Forget about viral and network effects, just provide great service and a great business. It doesn't have to be this ingenious idea, it's about treating your customers nicely and making things work.

So how do you start that? Don't think of deadlines, cause Zappos is selling fucking shoes. They are just selling better than the other guys! So how did we get started? Basecamp was started by a team of people doing stuff. So we didn't have a ton of time to do it, BC was a side project. Having a constraint (few hours per week) is good. I had 10 hours per week to develop Basecamp. When you have 10 hours per week, you can't screw around. Having less time is beneficial, you don't waste time on frivolous stuff.

We took 1 year before we let go of the consulting thing. Businesses don't start by themselves anyway.

# Startups : This Week in Startups - David Heinemeier Hansson, partner at 37signals and creator of Ruby on Rails

Question about blogging and shit.

Jason: So we had a series of websites connected together that share common sales/platform/design, the problem today is it a more crowded space. You have to pick a niche and pick it really well. You have to be really willing to invest money and go slow. You need writing talent, brand, and readers. 

This company went too niche, you want to write stories that they can retweet or comment or something, that's a story of impact. Start with "can you write a story that can get retweeted ten times, then twenty times, then make the front page of Digg, etc." Think of it on a per post or a per author basis.

DHH: Started from gaming review sites (1997). Picked up PHP to do something (2001). 

Approach: "Okay, what can I do without money?" Do things on the side, don't just put everything in one basket. It's a misconception that startups need external financing. This is the preferred way to go in my mind. When you start spending other people's money, you start making bad choices. You aren't going to learn how to make your money when you get someone else's money.

Why would I do something and I won't spend my money on it? I would rather that if I have to scale, I scale with money off revenues. In BC we are on 1 server for a year. By the time we needed a new server we were far off.

Honestly if we get 1M new users then we have a good problem even if the servers crash because we get new money. The problem is if "having users" but not getting money means you are spending more money.

I could not give a rat's ass about market share if we don't have profits. For Apple, even if they have low market share, they have good profits. Profits matter. Not market share, not number of people, not technoloy, none of this shit matters unless it leads to profits. There has to be an easier way to get to profits without getting the super market share.

Even if FB is super profitable, it's not the same because a lot of people didn't win that. If you're relying on some kind of market switch, something happens such as ad market goes down or something. You can't bank on a switch or something. It's more risky.

I don't understand because there are so many models where the business is there. Selling stuff to people where you make money than you spend to build the stuff. The ads make sense for Google and Mahalo because they are Gateway services but way too many companies think "they work for Google, they'll work for me".

Practical thing: Once you get to a point where you have $2M and $10M this is very small. Every thing from here on is very incremental. I would rather have a job I love because I enjoy it. I enjoy working too much. The payday thing where you retire on an island will only work for 6 months.

If you're not working on the best idea right now, you're doing it wrong. You should just be quitting. You should be working on your best idea right now. This might be my best idea, even at 25. Most companies have their best idea anyway. MS, they make their money from Office and Windows, which was their first idea.

I love money, but it's not just because of that. *I believe that profits is the best way to know if you're doing something great for the world.* This is a good feedback mechanism.

Revenues don't matter, profits do. If you can't get the profit, you're doing it wrong. None of this matters if it doesn't lead to profits. The foundation of business is to generate profits!

People now think of the exit. The goal is scale that somebody else can use. What I'm annoyed about is that when companies buying something. The vast majority of acquisitions do not pan out. These are delusions of grandeur, some sense of insanity.

The model of VCs, M&A is broken. Why not just build a fucking profitable business which is the goal in the end anyway? Can't we just start there instead of chasing this bubble idea. These bubble games don't increase wealth at all.

We can't just go for the frigging All-Stars like the Facebooks and the Amazons. That's why we're here. There is just as much potential for small businesses. We have 4 products, MS has 2!

I'd much rather focus on the millions of companies rather than the 500 companies of the Fortune 500. It takes a ton of shit to sell, account managers, etc. I don't want the grind.

Look at Salesforce, 7% profit??? They're dealing with a lot of people, quality of life, I would not trade with Salesforce.

I enjoy the 37signals part more than if I was going to speaking engagements.  What interests me are scalable businesses, where there is no connection between the amount of capital that goes in and the amount of profits that comes out. There is no reason to believe that 37s can be 100x bigger without adding 15-16 people.

I would like to increase the $ made/employees.

Everybody feature creeps. There is a role to actually reduce complexity. 

The "not worrying about rent" is closer than you think... like half a million? You can live off of years without worrying about rent with that. 

I want to be in the business that I want to be in the next 20 years. The correlation of MS and Google and Yahoo's success is not the hours but the execution.

Consumers will go for less, as long it is better designed. (Apple iPhone without copy paste lol).

I like S3 because I hate haggling with vendors for price.

# Startups: David H. Hansson, Partner at 37signals -TWiST #E337
[link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jzERXJgi5vQ)

I think the interesting things would be things like Dropbox. The companies that IPO'd without profits (Groupon, Zynga, Facebook) are wounded. Groupon showed that you can spend $1.40 to earn $1.00 lol. They did this thing that you hide the "marketing expense", they said it was a "non-recurring expense". Dollars are dollars, if you spend them in compensation or expense they are expended.

So a lot of people did get fooled and money disappeared.

People are fucking cheerleaders. They love to cheer on a good stock when it's growing, and when they crash everyone would do "ooh this is shit". Even if it's the fastest selling thing.

I think the media is bad, but even the people. The numbers are not complicated. I don't even know this stuff, but the numbers don't make sense. So now they're trying these other things, but that's just a different kind of business. Because the core business is shit!

Then the problem is they are also killing the local businesses too. Their profits get cut and they get the worst customers too. Now this makes sense for a business with fixed cost like a spa. But no media person calls out the shit when it starts flying. Media is a herd. They see everyone stampeding into one conclusion and they rush there lol.

The problem was they hit everything at a fast throttle, and they could have just ran at a slower pace.

BTW, we don't know much about anything. We know that development for the web will beat development for the desktop. Those we knew in 2004, and those we think was a big deal. The only thing was not many people want to buy business software online. But Amazon was able to solve the "give credit card to me online" problem. 

At first, we just wanted like $4000/month profit, lol. I hate the narrative that "we need to risk everything is the way to go", since we had zero financial risk. It was just our spare time that we risk.

Consulting is such an underrated thing. The number of people that have access to the VCs are sort of the bubble. The vast majority of the world doesn't have access to lines of capital. Even since the 3 years since we last had this conversation, everything is cheaper now. It's never been more true re: the risk for starting a business, even technical stuff.

Ex: Sharding the database. We keep on thinking that we might get to the shard part, but Moore's Law just keeps on catching up lol.

Lots of companies, big or small, figure out that hey, remote is pretty cool. I think the secret is that the problems first with Yahoo is that you want clarity in them. If you don't have intrinsic motivation for people to work, you aren't a good place to work, remote or not, period.

I like what Apple did: "make four products - laptop for consumers, laptop for pros, desktop for consumers, desktop for pros". So you want to axe things, like Google, axing Google Reader. The funny thing is that Yahoo still makes money. It's not like they're bleeding money. They have a problem with focus, how can we motivate people?

The axing thing, I think we did it right when we said that "no new people can join". If you stop launching new features and stop growing, at least it's some kind of a sunset.

A company exists to have profits for the founders to keep.

Apple, I think is the best company ever in terms of consumer electronics. They can milk this for a long time, in the same way that Microsoft is profitable with stuff from the 90s (Windows and Office), in the same way Google is profitable with Adwords. 

Just Samsung is the company that can compete with Apple but they suck in software. Samsung has the operational efficiency to rival Apple. They're doing things good enough to make a profit, but they are mistaken to believe that this exists because they can outsource their software development to Google.

Google is the example of perfect example of having super wealth that they can squander money on toys, lol. I don't think the Search Engine adwords thing is going to happen again. This is where Apple is unique because people are still willing to overpay for _new_ products, not MS, not Amazon.

I built my lifestyle to be able to work at 37signals forever. I'm not jealous of the "I want a $5M playout" because it's fleeting. The game I'm in is maximum happiness for the maximum amount of time. I love writing what I want to write, make what I want to make, with the people I like, without being told by others on what the fuck I have to do. This is super happiness. I love working with all the people I work it.

I'm humble enough to know that Basecamp is the best idea I ever had. My sense of serenity is that I know that it really is the best idea. Enduring sustainable long-term success, how many companies really have it? To me, the greatest satisfaction is to know that these things lasted. Right now, I don't need to work, honestly. But I'm thinking that if I will spend my entire life here, I have to make it good for me lol. This is why I hate the "founders cash out" thing, cause the employees get left behind. If I'm spending 8 hours a day thinking about Basecamp and 37signals, I should make it an enjoyable thing.

We want the problems be like really small shit, stuff like coffee and parking and like that, because we can improve it as opposed to culture etc.
