## A Guide To Lifelong Employability For Tech Pros
[Link](http://www.reddit.com/r/cscareerquestions/comments/19h2bm/a_guide_to_lifelong_employability_for_tech_pros)

*How do certain people get job offers without having to even interview?* Pros that are always in demand and rarely (if ever) unemployed seem to share certain sets of habits.

*Interview.* How often do you interview when you are not actively looking for a job? For most the answer is never, and I’d encourage you to take at least a couple interviews a year. Going on the occasional interview can serve two purposes. First, _they are a way to make new contacts and keep your name in the minds of potential employers_, with the added benefit that these same interviewers may be working at new companies in a year or two. One interview could lead to an ‘in’ with four or five companies down the road. Second, _it is the only way to keep interview skills sharp_.

*Know when to leave your job.* Without question, the group having the toughest time finding work are unemployed with say ten+ years at the same company. I would add that older engineers who possess the habits outlined here are the group being hired without interviews. The definition of job hopping has morphed over the past fifteen years, and it is now understood that semi-regular movement is expected and accepted. Conversely, someone who has remained at a company for many years may be viewed by employers as loyal to a fault and potentially unambitious. If this person has solid skills, why has no company picked him/her up yet? Changing jobs before stagnating is critical to overall employability, and how quickly you stagnate will vary based primarily on your employer’s choices, your own ability to recognize that stagnation is happening, and your desire to not let it happen.

*Make ‘future marketability’ a primary criterion when choosing jobs or projects.* Carefully consider how a new position will impact your ability to find work later in your career and use that as one of your key incentives when evaluating opportunities. Does the company tend to use proprietary languages and frameworks that will not be useful later in your career? How will this look on my résumé? _Many candidates today are choosing jobs or projects based on an opportunity to learn a new skill, and for this they are usually willing to sacrifice some other criteria._

*Reach out to others in the community (not coworkers).* How many times have you sent an unsolicited email to someone in your field that you don’t know? “Congrats on your new release, product looks great!” or “Saw that you open sourced, look forward to checking it out” as an email or a tweet is an effective way to create a positive impression with a person or organization. Twitter is great as a public acknowledgment tool, and the character limit can actually be advantageous (no babbling). If you stumble on an article about a local company doing something interesting, there is much to be gained by a 140 character pat on the back. This is essentially networking without the investment of time.

*Lunch with others (again, not coworkers).* You have to eat lunch anyway, so how about inviting someone you don’t know that well to lunch? Meeting with other tech pros outside an interview or meetup environment enables everyone to let their guard down, which leads to honest discussions about the experience of working at a company that you may consider in the future.

*Public speaking.* This is an effective way to get attention as an authority in a subject matter, even on a local level. Preparing a presentation can be time consuming, but generally a wise investment. Even speaking to a somewhat small group once a year can help build your reputation.

*Attend a conference or group meeting.* Even getting to an event quarterly keeps you on the radar of others. Make an appearance just to show your face and say hi to a few people.

*Reading and writing about technology.* As for writing, even just making comments and discussing articles has some value, with perhaps more value (for job hunting purposes) in places like Stack Overflow or Hacker News where your comments are scored and can be quantified. _Creating your own body of written work should improve your understanding of a topic, demonstrate your ability to articulate that topic, and heighten your standing within the community._

*Build a personal code repo.* Many in the industry balk at this due to the time required, but having some code portfolio seems to be on the rise as an expectation hiring firms have for many senior level candidates. _If the code you wrote at work is not available for demonstration during interviews, working on a personal project is more critical._
