# Software engineers who have climbed the ranks and made lots of money: how do you do it?
[link](http://www.reddit.com/r/cscareerquestions/comments/2g5xyd/software_engineers_who_have_climbed_the_ranks_and/)

1. *Always think in terms of the business.* Figure out what actually makes the company money. Figure out how you actively contribute to that. *When asked to do something, don't ask if it's "your job", ask yourself, "Is this right for the business?" because anything that's right for the business is your job.* Understand that sometimes management is cutting corners to be first to market or to try and leapfrog a competitor because those are better for the business long term than shipping the most features and you fighting against them is not going to make that any easier.

2. *Be a people person, and more importantly, a team player.* The key to everything else on this list is being able to create buy-in among groups of people who aren't you and communicate effectively. *One key way you achieve that is by being genuinely appreciative, understanding, empathetic, helpful, and positive, and by not being negative, disrespectful, closed off, aggressive, or mean-spirited.*

I'm the guy who always says thank you, who always praises good work and will give unsolicited feedback to your manager on how much you nailed it on that last project. I'll try and help you figure out your issue or direct you to who can, and reassure you that your questions are totally normal and don't make you any less of an engineer. I never resent anyone who is not-so-great or struggling - I instead do everything in my power to make them better. I'll go to bat for you if I'm in a meeting with Directors and upper management and someone says you haven't been pulling your weight or says, "What has XYZ been up to these days? I feel like I don't see him/her doing much." I never, ever throw anyone under the bus. I become intimately familiar with what everyone else on the team is good at so that I can leverage their strengths to succeed at every cross-team effort I'm leading and get them more exposure. I also know what they're passionate about and not so passionate about. I know who asks lots of questions and who is often skeptical of new ideas. I know exactly whose offices I need to visit before the big meetings and pitch them my idea in person and sell them on it beforehand so that I can address all their questions instead of doing it in front of a large group where - even if I can answer every question without a problem - it'll make me look less credible and underprepared. I understand that 99% of the time, decisions are made long before the meeting to discuss them ever happens. This is true for everything - architectural designs, tooling decisions, feature cuts, who's getting promoted this year, everything. Being a team player and being a people person means not being liked so much as knowing your team. You know your team and you use that knowledge, you'll naturally cultivate a following. Followings cultivate leaders. Leaders get to set the agenda.

3. *Be accountable and take responsibility.* Admit when you were wrong or something was your fault, and always have an answer prepared for how you're going to make it right or prevent it next time. Don't make excuses for things that failed or didn't work out or come in late and never, ever, give them unless explicitly asked. Making excuses comes across as shirking responsibility and, right or wrong, will make you seem less competent. But never shy away from being held accountable for your own actions. It cultivates trust and people can count on you to be honest.

4. *Be reliable.* I never make promises I can't keep (Even if that means telling people no), so being reliable is easy. I don't drop the ball on things. I take on what I can handle and then ramp it up only when I know I can handle more.

5. *Take opportunities.* Whether that thing succeeds or fails, you're going to be better off than if you hadn't - if it succeeds, it's a win and shows you're capable and you'll be at the front of the line when the next opportunity arrives; if it fails, you learn from the experience and know what to do better next time.

6. *Take action.* A lot of people see that the production servers are down, or the check-in system is acting up, or there's a bug in the client, or some critical documentation is wrong, and then...they do nothing. *If you've got #1 down and you know what's important for the business, you should then know when you should put down your own work (Which is likely less important, less critical, and less valuable to the company) and go fix the damn problem.* And if you can't fix it, no one is going to fault you for failing. You'll get considerably more good will by trying and screwing up than you would by doing nothing.

7. *Show grace under fire.* If something is coming in hot, if things are going awry, if people on your team are panicking, be the calming force for everyone else. Show poise. Don't waste your time with excuses (So important I'm mentioning it again), don't waste your time focusing on how bad things are - instead focus your efforts on finding a solution and turning the ship around.

8. *Recognize that your manager is your biggest ally.* Doesn't matter how much of a rockstar you are, if your manager isn't in your corner, you will never advance. Plain and simple. You get ahead in this world and really in any business by having 'sponsors.' Your direct manager is really the one sponsor that everyone gets for free, without needing to ask. Leverage him or her. Always understand their expectations and always communicate with them to make sure they align with yours. Don't resent them if they're not great - instead think about how to make them better. Understand that they are in the position they are in for a reason.

9. *At the end of the day, always make sure you are actively creating value.* You can be an awesome people person who everyone loves, you can be calm in tough situations, you can be responsible, you can have a great manager, and you can understand the business, but all of that is meaningless if you're not creating value for the company. Find gaps and areas where your product or team can improve, make a plan, get buy-in from stakeholders, execute on it, and make sure people are aware of it. If you're worried about it being rejected but you know it's going to create business value (#1), don't ask for permission - just do it and ask for forgiveness later. Take action (#6), but make sure you're not duplicating work and stepping on toes (#2). Collaborate whenever you can. Measure everything so that the value you're creating is objectively visible and easily communicated.

---
- Don't stay where you're not learning anything.
- Be aggressive when negotiating for your offer at a new company and at review time, and otherwise be humble and helpful.
- Keep track of what you do that benefits the company and if possible calculate the tangible benefits of your work. Keep a journal. It will help you in future negotiations with that employer and others in the form of an accomplishment-centric résumé.
- This is the best advice, also: titles matter. When you take a position negotiate for the best title you can, if possible.
- When you're already at a company, raises are probably not going to be amazing. You sometimes hear about people getting big raises and what not, but I think it's common that you'll get fairly standard raises in the 3 - 5 percent range.
- Additionally, companies may adjust their hiring salaries to meet market trends, but not necessarily apply this same practice to their current workforce - you already work for them, so if you don't ask, they don't have to care.

- And yes, there is the other side - as you work for a company, you build up a lot of institutional knowledge and possibly get more specialized. You may start thinking of yourself as being important, perhaps critical, to some vital part of the company. *And the truth is, you're probably not as important as you think.* It's a delusion that a lot of us have had. There are probably a handful of critical people like that in any company, where losing them would mean extremely significant lost productivity/expertise/knowledge, and the company will throw sacks with dollar signs on them at these people to retain them, or will give them promotions to meet their demands. For you, you may not know how the company really views your worth to them until it comes down to brass tacks.

- Managers/Employers rarely value what they have when they have it. They always want to improve. *If you have 3 good, busy engineers and are given a spot for a fourth, few managers would say "I want to hire someone less experienced and less capable than my current engineers".* They all want the best person possible which means they've just subconsciously decided everyone they already have is less valuable. So when they find someone they think is awesome, they will pay them the highest salary on the team. Then 2 of the 3 other engineers get fed up and leave, and at their new jobs they are the shiny new person who gets the top of market salary. I've seen it multiple times. *The first handful of people can be entry or mid level, but instead of promoting them as they get better the team will bring in more external people to fill the higher level slots.* Also, as you work with someone for year, you learn their shortcomings. You never know an interview candidate's shortcomings so it's easy to think "Wow this person is way better than anyone we already have".
- Value has nothing to do with how much you are paid. HR has to step in and determine how much people should earn otherwise no one would work for what the managers want to pay. Businesses are not interested in paying to keep valuable employees. Businesses are interested in achieving business goals, some of which might involve getting rid of all the expensive valuable employees.
- I'm never worried about changing my job for starters. I look forward to working in new places. I never apologise to interviewers about working at places for short periods (no shorter than 6 months though). I only accept direct hire jobs on salary. And most importantly, no matter how much I need a job, I always make sure I am always getting a raise with each move forward. I make myself worth the money by being polite but to the point, and by solving top level problems for companies so they miss me when I leave. Because they miss me once I'm gone, and because I almost always leave on good terms, they always give me excellent references.
