## 125 RR Loyalty and Layoffs
[Link](http://rubyrogues.com/125-rr-loyalty-and-layoffs/)

DAVID: The takeaway from it is that a corporation is just a fiction. It’s a document that exists for a purpose. And if you do not serve that purpose, you have no place there. And the CEO’s job is actually to get rid of you. Or he is incompetent or she is incompetent if they don’t fire you for this. So, being loyal to that corporation is a sickness, it’s a madness and don’t do it. But you absolutely can be loyal.

JAMES:  I guess there’s a couple of points that sounded like that maybe [inaudible]. First is this kind of idea that the company isn’t really on your side. They’re on their side.

JOSH:  I think going into it, it’s sort of an abusive relationship from the start. When you go work for a company, from the very beginning, they don’t pay you what you’re worth. Because if they paid you what you were worth, they wouldn’t be able to make any money off of you. If you were generating some amount of value and they were paying you what that value was worth, there would be no margin on it for them. So, working for somebody else is always something like of an abusive relationship because you’re always doing something that you’re never getting compensated fairly for.

JOSH:  And we talked about this on the episode a couple of weeks ago where sometimes, it’s just really worth taking a lower hourly rate so that the consulting firm can take care of all that business stuff that you don’t want to deal with. And if you go into those situations with your eyes open, I think there’s nothing wrong with being in that kind of business relationship with an employer. But it’s not an even-powered dynamic, "You can walk off the job, we’ll find somebody to replace you." It depends on whether it’s like a buyers’ or sellers’ market. Sometimes if you walk off the job, they can’t find anyone to replace you and then they’re desperate and you have more power. That’s probably like more of a conversation to have a little later about that power dynamic and how that either helps or hurts you depending on which way it’s going.

DAVID: The short answer is that the responsibilities that you place on yourself are perfectly legitimate. They are part of your professional duty. They’re part of your professional behavior. They’re part of your professional character and they are what makes you ‘you’. And if you choose to give that to a company for money, great. As long as you’re choosing to do that, that is absolutely fine.

The moment it becomes dangerous is when you cross this boundary of putting your trust in the corporation and you sacrifice your career. At some point in the future, you’re going to have an exit interview. *And after that point in time, if you have not been investing in your career or in your professional network or in yourself or whatever, if you have sacrificed those investment things prior to that time, you have acted in an irresponsible fashion to yourself.*

CHUCK:  I want to go back a little bit to your talking about profit and value for a minute and mainly just point out that it connects to another point that Dave made and that was that the corporation is kind of this fiction. It’s not a person that can have loyalty toward you. And in a lot of cases, if they’re public companies, the CEO has a fiduciary responsibility to basically maximize profits and increase the stock price. And even if it’s a privately held company, he still has a responsibility to the Board to basically do the same thing.

DAVID:  No. But you’re right. I mean, the company is a machine theoretically, metaphorically. And when somebody leaves, that part falls off the machine, they replace the part and then move on.

DAVID:  I finally wrote a follow-up called Loyalty and Trust in which I went through the definitions of loyalty and trust and vulnerability. And loyalty just means giving or showing firm constant support or allegiance to a person or institution. And that’s good loyalty, you should do that.

"So, if you are working for a company, what should you do loyalty wise?" You should do your job. You should be professionally ethical. *If you can see something is coming down the pipe that is going to destroy the company, you have an obligation to let your manager know that you can see this coming.* You are an engineer if you are doing some kind of database search and they’re saying, "In order to survive scaling, we have to shard the database." But you know that there’s no way to search across multiple shards without completely reinventing the infrastructure. You have an obligation to let your manager know that your scaling strategy isn’t going to work. "We’re going to go bankrupt if we do this." *You have an ethical obligation to not sit on your butt and watch the clock. You have an ethical obligation to not steal from the company, not embezzle, not do the things that your CEO’s probably doing.*

Go get the certification. You should do that. If your company won’t help you do it, go do it on your own dime. That’s where your loyalty to your own career and your company’s demand for loyalty fall in conflict and when they come in conflict, you should show loyalty to yourself first.

JOSH: Past clients, past employers, it’s a good idea to stay on good terms with them. If you’re going to have to make that choice, make the choice in your own benefit, not worrying [inaudible] companies. And you just have to, at some point, suck it up and be willing to burn a bridge and know that you’re never going to be able to go back to that company and work there again, maybe you’ll lose a friend or two. Those are not easy decisions to make but it’s like, for me, you got to take care of yourself because you know the company is not going to take care of you in the long run.

DAVID:  The two Steven’s that wrote Freakonomics, they said that 5% of the population are incorrigible no matter how much you tempt them and no matter how much you guarantee that they will not get caught, they will not break a rule and no matter how little the punishment will be. 3% of the population are incorrigible no matter how likely they’ll be caught. No matter how bad the punishment is, they will still break a rule. The remaining 92% of the population have a price. And it is important to know what your price is, like Calvin and Hobbes, everyone has a price. Mine is $0.75.

AVDI:  I was just going to say I think the experience of the freelancers here is really useful. And for myself, I kind of wished that I had done some freelance work earlier. I feel like everyone should do a little bit of freelance. You don’t have to stick with it. But if you’re in software, you should do a little bit of freelance.

AVDI:  *I think freelance gives you a better idea of how the world is actually working and what the work relationship really is. The thing is no matter whether you’re full-time or freelance, you’re negotiating time for money.* You’re negotiating that you will give your services to some entity in return for money. And that’s really all you’re doing. And that’s very clear when you’re a freelance or a consultant, whatever you want to call it. But it gets sort of wrapped up in all this cultural baggage which is what we’ve just been talking about when you’re doing it for a full-time position at a company. But it’s really the same negotiation and it’s interesting how similar it really can be.

A lot of people think of getting a job as this sort of sign or don’t scenario, it’s sort of like a job at big co is this commodity thing. And they don’t even realize that even just getting a job at some big co, you actually have a lot of leeway in how you can negotiate your contract. You can negotiate that they don’t own the thoughts in your head when you go home and work on open source in your spare time. A lot of people don’t think they can negotiate that but you can do it.

The first Rails job I had, I negotiated that after an initial period, I would have an increasing amount of work-from-home time. So, it’s the same deal. You’re negotiating your work for their money. And the more you can view it that way, the more that you understand that you are a more or less sovereign individual who is making a choice to make a deal with this company, I think the better you are set to manage your career effectively rather than thinking of yourself as sort of a supplicant or something to these companies.

CHUCK:  I’ve kind of gone through that too but I take allude I’d take it to that extreme. I’ve worked with people that I would do whatever it took for them personally. And I would do whatever it took to a certain degree professionally. And I think it’s healthy to have that loyalty to those people because you kind to build the network, you get to know people. By the way, I hate the term ‘network’. You build relationships with these people that mean something. And it’s important. But at the same time, at a certain point, you’re hurting yourself too much. I don’t know what the right answer is because I think we all want to please other people and be there for them. But you still have to kind of keep respect there.

DAVID:  I just want to point out that I think James and Chuck have hit it right on the head. One of the follow-up posts I wrote was about loyalty and trust. If you watched the Brene Brown videos that we picked several episodes back about vulnerability, there’s a cycle of loyalty and trust. I give you trust — or no. I show loyalty to you and you’ve come to trust me and so, you show me a little of vulnerability. And so, I eventually show you more loyalty and I respect that vulnerability and you trust me more. This forms a cycle, it’s a virtuous cycle. It’s called building a friendship. This is increasing the amount of trust and vulnerability that you’re willing to share. And eventually, you reach a point where you’re willing to share your dreams and your aspirations with your coworkers because they’re not just your team anymore. Now, they’re your friends. And this is no longer a business arrangement, this is actually a friendship.

*Marcus Buckingham said that one of the top ten things determining job happiness is can you honestly say that you have a best friend at work.*

JOSH:  It doesn’t spoil it. It’s a modern fable by Ursula Le Guin and she talks about basically the fundamental ethical conundrum: does the good of the many outweigh the good of the few or the one. But the point of the story is there are people who are enfaced with this untenable ethical conundrum, walk away from it. They are not willing to enjoy the benefits of a system that is based on the suffering of someone else.

AVDI:  My overall conclusion that sort of guided my philosophy since then was that money is important. It’s a good idea to have that buffer that people talk about, the savings buffer and stuff like that. And it is a truly immense amount of money that can actually give you a safety net. And a lot of us don’t even have the [inaudible] to build that kind of thing up. *The conclusion I came to is that the most important investment you can make is connections.* And so, I kind of set about the guiding light of my career became not where can I make more money, but how can I make more connections.

There’s been the value of always have something of my own that I’m working on, have something that rather than just grounding for work when I suddenly lose a job have something that I think can make some money that I can work on during that period. *But the biggest philosophical guiding light has been do what I need to do to build connections whether that involves participating in local users groups, participating in conferences, social networking. Just emailing people saying, “I really like that thing you did.” And of course, participating in open source, something I still wish I did more of.*

But really to my mind, the only safety net that matters, the only safety net that’s going to see me through to, hopefully, the end of my days is going to be the one that exists because I’m known because people know me, because people hopefully like me and care about me. And that is what you need to work on.

DAVID:  *But absolutely, that is the single most important thing that you can do to increase your power of control over your own career. The only thing I would add to it is if you’re just starting out, here’s the bad news: you’re going to have to do more than just your job. You have to do your job and then you have to do more. You have to invest in community, you have to invest in your career.*

JOSH:  When I was writing my blog, I was writing this blog, my blog got really popular and it was all about providing information that made it easier for people to learn how to program in Rails and Ruby. Then I did things like organize meet-ups and put on conferences and now, I’m doing this podcast. It’s not all self-serving like it might sound here. But a big part of that is I’m doing stuff that I know is a contribution to other people. That’s really the juice in this professional networking. I don’t think that professional networking where you go to a “networking event” and everybody’s wearing name tags and chatting among yourselves over cocktails and finger food. That’s not networking. That’s socializing.

JOSH:  Yeah. The thing that has two or three greater orders of magnitude effectiveness is seeing what it is that helps other people in your community and doing that stuff. So, working on meet-ups, mentoring people, doing RailsBridge training, what have you. Get out there and do stuff that helps other people. And do it in a completely generous way. Go out there and do stuff that helps people. Eventually, that will pay off in the long run.

AVDI:  It does. It earns interest in a way that’s very similar to making financial investments because those people, that random person that you help now, that person that’s just getting started or something, that maybe the person who, five years from now or ten years from now, is a VP and thinks of you. You can look at this in a very calculating way. But you can also look at this as basically we’re telling you to be a healthy human being with the community. And that pays off.

AVDI:  I have some friends who, over the years, encouraged me. They do things like encouraging me to write or encouraging me to do talks and reviewed some stuff that I’d written. Just generally, kind of push me forward over the years. If they were looking for a job now, I would move mountains to find them something. And that really just falls under the category of being interested. You find somebody who’s doing something cool, somebody who does a neat even amateurish presentation at your users group and you encourage them. That’s where it all starts.

DAVID:  But there is a study shown that loose acquaintances will actually do more for you than close acquaintances in certain regards. And the reason why is because they know that they’re in your extended tribe and there’s actually something of value to them for moving ten shovels of dirt. And that is the opportunity to move closer to being inside your close tribe. And so, there’s actually a social payoff for them helping you.

And so, if you’re afraid of talking to people, join Toastmasters. It’s the best group you can join for being an introvert and learning how to be able to open up and just talk to somebody.
