mountaineering/til-per-climb.md, before:

## Purgatory: July 25-26 2015

- Take Bonamine before every mountain wherein you go through a zigzag road trail.
- Everyone needs at least 30L pack, having a smaller pack will force you to make hasty decisions and possibly underpack.
- Always bring tying strings/pegs even if you may not need them because you never know when you need a tempo shelter.
- Precooking works, but bring spices so you can continue seasoning while cooking.
- When putting pots and pans over the spider stove, add an allowance for the weight of the handle.
- When transferring fluids, take care to think of which surfaces the liquid will land on if it spills (ex: THE STOVE).
- It seems like a good idea to invest in a multifuel stove (butane is hard to control).
- Everyone needs a malong, extra socks (wool), either sleeping bag or emergency blanket for the campsite.
- 2 takal of rice for 2 meals for 2 people is correct ratio.
- Get an egg holder.
- Bring multivitamins next time.
- Hiking is better with contact lens on.
- Tacos break, try getting pita bread next time for taco-style dishes. Also need more than 2 tomatoes.
- No more cooking oil, they sleep, just use olive oil.
- Small containers for food coloring can be bought at Savemore, just remove the contents. Can be used for soap too.
- Trekking pole on stone steps--place it in the center of the step.
- Possibly get a shoe bag stuff sack so your dirty shoes won't float at the outside of the pack.
- Level up in rice cooking.
- Nips is imba trail food. 2 Nips per day per person.
- Good Taste in Baguio = good food value, 90 for most meals and there are group options.
- Good thing that I was able to sleep on the journey home. :)

## Talamitam/Tagaytay: July 17 2015

- Get used to sleeping in a hammock, also you have to master slip knot since all the other hitches are hard to untie with
- Early morning hikes (starting at around 4-5am) are awesome. I actually think we woke the guides up.
- Egg holder if you plan on bringing noodles when you go up
- Fire building, you can only put wet wood on the fire if you are confident that the flame is powerful enough to cause the water vapor to evaporate before burning the wood itself
- It is possible to create a tempo shelter out of cogon grass, there just has to be the right way of cording it
- #squadgoals are awesome, good way to motivate everyone to finish the climb.
- Still need to increase core/back strength, you lean forward when you climb.
- Skyway toll is around +30 to +50.
- Tagaytay Mahogany Market costs: 2 Bulalo, 1 Tawilis, 16 cups of rice, 7 soft drinks: 1325.
- Nasugbu is about 30 minutes from Tagaytay.
- Possibly add facial wash to your soap kit.
- Don't forget trekking polo and jogging pants.
- Machete grip: put lanyard on the wrist
- Ferrocerium and knife: Use the spine, not the blade
- Next time take a lot of pictures.

## Maculot: July 4 2015

- FUCK IT IS STILL HARD FOR YOU TO SLEEP BEFORE THE CLIMB
- Repair kit for torn packs and torn shorts, learn how to use it
- Packed lunch--double check itinerary to ensure that you don't buy overpriced lunches.
- Really, really, avoid overpopulated mountains during the weekends because your itinerary will be delayed.
- Save itinerary and times on your phone or print it out, don't be lazy about this
- Literally any place in Lipa is good for Lomi.
- First trip to Batangas on Jam Liner is 4am, next is 5am.
- Maculot can be climbed at any time, even at night.
- Last trips out of Batangas are around 8pm, some 9pm.
- Heavy traffic from Cuenca to Lipa at night.
- Just do not drink soft drinks.
- Put ice in the hydration pack it will last for the first x hours.
- Better to just pool everyone's money and accounting after.
- Pen and paper may be needed to write stuff down.

## Random talk

- Gap between bottle and fire because the bottle cools the fire
- Pillowcase
- UV Rashguard is needed. Need to apply sunscreen every 2 hours.
- Try to get a Columbia Silver Ridge for your trekking polo top to prevent UV.
- If you're hiking uphill, lace your shoes more loosely to allow for blood flow. If going downhill, lace your shoes more tightly to keep your feet in place and not rubbing the toes of your shoes.
- Longer hikes: When resting every hour, elevate your feet for 5-10 minutes.
- Snacks: Dried fruit? :)

## Pico de Loro: June 27 2015

- It is still nearly impossible for you to sleep for an early morning trip so better to sleep before super
- Go for long-sleeved shirt rather than short-sleeved shirt + rash guard combo (you might lose the rash guard, more parts, aesthetically better in photos)
- The Mountainsmith trekking poles are not so good, they jam frequently :(
- Need a new carabiner for the Camelbak on the daypack
- Try just bringing sandwiches for trail food as opposed to buying expensive foods. Rebisco works
- Near impossible to do 2 dayhikes on Sat/Sun because of sleep deprivation. Try Fri-Sun next time.
- Fire vs mosquitoes

## Ugo: June 13-14 2015

- Bring toothpaste
- Compartmentalize kikay kit
- Your cotton socks suck
- Prioritize sun protection--get a long sleeved trekking shirt
- Reflectors on tent pegs are legit
- Improvised VSS using staff: no need to spin it to stake it down
- Don't forget you can use random branches as improvised stakes/pegs
- Do not under any circumstance use cow shit as "weight"
- Look for melon-sized rocks ASAP as possible pegs
- You can use peg to remove the other peg that is dug so deep
- Cooking rice: Full blast until boiling, then weaken a bit and let the boiling water escape
- Costing: Estimate what the true cost of the climb is
- Better to have too much trail food than too little. Jerky is okay but super expensive. Prunes are not that of much use. Tuna sandwich perhaps next time?
- Get a Smart sim card most Internet in the province is via Smart
- The fucking cord/iPod is hard to charge so get a better setup
- I think ziplocking each day of clothes is easier than putting them in a compression bag
- Lolo's windbreaker is too large and tbh not that effective
- Flash the cow in case it comes too near to your tent
- Check load lifter angle because your pack might not be fitted correctly
- Try not to drink too much soft drinks, just drink normal water
- Ugo--no need to have much water, but before going to the camp site you really need a lot
- Delirium in campsite: take a nap
- Important: Some people don't want your help, they are doing the climb to prove something to themselves, as a social person recognize it
- Don't forget extra batteries for your homies
- When splitting a tent, you have to be near the person you are splitting the tent with, so when you reach the campsite, you can pitch easily

## Tibig: June 6-7 2015

- Gain knowledge of how to cook sinigang: Meat first then tomato/onion then string beans then eggplant
- If you properly precook the meat will last for a week
- Better knowledge of how to cook rice: Whatever the height of the rice is, that should be the height of the water, and you can put plastic on the end
- Clove hitch to the pegs because you can move the pegs around. Or do a taut line on the pegs
- When you don't have a corner grommet you can put a one peso coin or small stone, and then put a clove hitch under the resulting knot
- To form the center of the VSS on a trekking pole, clove hitch a small tying string on it
- Label your cookset with some string or something
- Dont forget pandan for rice
- Blowtorch can be helpful on a marshmallow, then melt all chocolates to make "fondue"
- No black tying strings it is easy to lose
- Check tent campsite for stones/rocks so it is nicer for you to sleep
- Since the tent is freestanding clean out debris before you dismantle it
- Knick knacks as trail food is not that good since the chocolate melts

## Tagapo: June 5 2015

- Notify your contact person
- Charge phone before leaving

## Binacayan/Pamitinan: May 28 2015

- Bring a tarp at the back of the vehicle always
- Bring newspaper and plastic at back of vehicle
- Know how to actually use a shemagh setup
- Practice going on top of stones to conquer your fear of heights
- Sometimes no trail food needed if maikli lang talaga yung distance

## Pinatubo via 4x4: May 23 2015

- Do not leave trek pole in the car

## Sembrano: May 21 2015

- Navigation
- Trail sign seeing
- The ability to fashion tungkods from nowhere
- Use gatorade cover as spoon if there is no spoon

## Binacayan/Pamitinan: May 16-17 2015

- You can cover hydration with malong or insulators to still keep it cold

## Banahaw de Liliw

- Be super praning sa rain, possibly bring more waterproofing than usual
- Shorten trek poles when ascending ala vertical limit
- Refill hydration pack before start of a trek because it is hard to check
- Additional pair of clothes or at least
- Try tent peg reflector baka mawala yung pegs ulit huhu
- Be disciplined sa tent pitching
- This is where you have to be super good at knots because the tempo shelter will not be pogi if knots are bad
- Actually just be good at tempo shelter
- Earthpad, better if yung earthpad na insulator kasi di talaga nababasa yun
- Always wear hipbelt sobrang mabilis mapagod ang shoulder, better talaga if back na lang
- Crossing logs, sit if you have to, low center of gravity
- Mandatory to have gloves
- Rash guards are really for rashes
- When climbing do not wear windbreaker or jacket. just go with baselayer... you will produce heat anyway. just wear your windbreaker when you are at top
- Survival blanket will save your frigging ass so DO NOT RUIN IT
- Know where the damned trowel is at all times

## Makiling

- Trail food
- Easily accessible hydration. Proper way of hydration
- Hindi porket nagawa mo yung 10k ibig sabihin kaya mo na yung climb, iba yun
- Practice cooking at home so you can actually do shit
- Hydrite is your friend
- More than 1 pair of pants mawawarat pants mo
- Number of days+1!

## Bungkol Baka

- Windbreaker near top of pack
- Precooking, do not cook the
- Vegetables rot easily
- We do not wear flip flops because of the risk of ankle sprains

Commit message:

Add TIL in Mt. Batulao

mountaineering/til-per-climb.md, after:

## Batulao: August 1 2015

- Need a smaller trash bag so your shit doesn't spill when you just put it in a pocket.
- Bring FA even if you have a designated FA already.
- Good thing you brought a lot of painkiller.
- The Pork and Beans they sell in the market do not have a lot of calories in them. Not really good trail food.
- All boys = not that many pictures.
- Figure out a way to keep cooler during hot climbs especially in the Batangas mountains.

## Purgatory: July 25-26 2015

- Take Bonamine before every mountain wherein you go through a zigzag road trail.
- Everyone needs at least 30L pack, having a smaller pack will force you to make hasty decisions and possibly underpack.
- Always bring tying strings/pegs even if you may not need them because you never know when you need a tempo shelter.
- Precooking works, but bring spices so you can continue seasoning while cooking.
- When putting pots and pans over the spider stove, add an allowance for the weight of the handle.
- When transferring fluids, take care to think of which surfaces the liquid will land on if it spills (ex: THE STOVE).
- It seems like a good idea to invest in a multifuel stove (butane is hard to control).
- Everyone needs a malong, extra socks (wool), either sleeping bag or emergency blanket for the campsite.
- 2 takal of rice for 2 meals for 2 people is correct ratio.
- Get an egg holder. 60 from Brown Trekker.
- Bring multivitamins next time.
- Hiking is better with contact lens on.
- Tacos break, try getting pita bread next time for taco-style dishes. Also need more than 2 tomatoes.
- No more cooking oil, they sleep, just use olive oil.
- Small containers for food coloring can be bought at Savemore, just remove the contents. You can put olive oil inside. This can also be used for soap.
- Trekking pole on stone steps--place it in the center of the step, you tripped here.
- Possibly get a shoe bag stuff sack so your dirty shoes won't float at the outside of the pack.
- Level up in rice cooking. Try stirring the rice after it boils.
- Nips is imba trail food. 2 Nips per day per person seems to be a good ratio.
- Even on a major climb, I just consumed 1L of water the first day. (I think I also consumed 500ml Gatorade.
- Need a more compact first aid kit.
- Get a sleeping bag for lining the hammock, you will die outside if you don't.
- Good Taste in Baguio = good food value, 90 for most meals and there are group options.
- Good thing that I was able to sleep on the journey home. :)

## Talamitam/Tagaytay: July 17 2015

- Get used to sleeping in a hammock, also you have to master slip knot since all the other hitches are hard to untie with
- Early morning hikes (starting at around 4-5am) are awesome. I actually think we woke the guides up.
- Egg holder if you plan on bringing noodles when you go up
- Fire building, you can only put wet wood on the fire if you are confident that the flame is powerful enough to cause the water vapor to evaporate before burning the wood itself
- It is possible to create a tempo shelter out of cogon grass, there just has to be the right way of cording it
- #squadgoals are awesome, good way to motivate everyone to finish the climb.
- Still need to increase core/back strength, you lean forward when you climb.
- Skyway toll is around +30 to +50.
- Tagaytay Mahogany Market costs: 2 Bulalo, 1 Tawilis, 16 cups of rice, 7 soft drinks: 1325.
- Nasugbu is about 30 minutes from Tagaytay.
- Possibly add facial wash to your soap kit.
- Don't forget trekking polo and jogging pants.
- Machete grip: put lanyard on the wrist
- Ferrocerium and knife: Use the spine, not the blade
- Next time take a lot of pictures.

## Maculot: July 4 2015

- FUCK IT IS STILL HARD FOR YOU TO SLEEP BEFORE THE CLIMB
- Repair kit for torn packs and torn shorts, learn how to use it
- Packed lunch--double check itinerary to ensure that you don't buy overpriced lunches.
- Really, really, avoid overpopulated mountains during the weekends because your itinerary will be delayed.
- Save itinerary and times on your phone or print it out, don't be lazy about this
- Literally any place in Lipa is good for Lomi.
- First trip to Batangas on Jam Liner is 4am, next is 5am.
- Maculot can be climbed at any time, even at night.
- Last trips out of Batangas are around 8pm, some 9pm.
- Heavy traffic from Cuenca to Lipa at night.
- Just do not drink soft drinks.
- Put ice in the hydration pack it will last for the first x hours.
- Better to just pool everyone's money and accounting after.
- Pen and paper may be needed to write stuff down.

## Random talk

- Gap between bottle and fire because the bottle cools the fire
- Pillowcase
- UV Rashguard is needed. Need to apply sunscreen every 2 hours.
- Try to get a Columbia Silver Ridge for your trekking polo top to prevent UV.
- If you're hiking uphill, lace your shoes more loosely to allow for blood flow. If going downhill, lace your shoes more tightly to keep your feet in place and not rubbing the toes of your shoes.
- Longer hikes: When resting every hour, elevate your feet for 5-10 minutes.
- Snacks: Dried fruit? :)

## Pico de Loro: June 27 2015

- It is still nearly impossible for you to sleep for an early morning trip so better to sleep before super
- Go for long-sleeved shirt rather than short-sleeved shirt + rash guard combo (you might lose the rash guard, more parts, aesthetically better in photos)
- The Mountainsmith trekking poles are not so good, they jam frequently :(
- Need a new carabiner for the Camelbak on the daypack
- Try just bringing sandwiches for trail food as opposed to buying expensive foods. Rebisco works
- Near impossible to do 2 dayhikes on Sat/Sun because of sleep deprivation. Try Fri-Sun next time.
- Fire vs mosquitoes

## Ugo: June 13-14 2015

- Bring toothpaste
- Compartmentalize kikay kit
- Your cotton socks suck
- Prioritize sun protection--get a long sleeved trekking shirt
- Reflectors on tent pegs are legit
- Improvised VSS using staff: no need to spin it to stake it down
- Don't forget you can use random branches as improvised stakes/pegs
- Do not under any circumstance use cow shit as "weight"
- Look for melon-sized rocks ASAP as possible pegs
- You can use peg to remove the other peg that is dug so deep
- Cooking rice: Full blast until boiling, then weaken a bit and let the boiling water escape
- Costing: Estimate what the true cost of the climb is
- Better to have too much trail food than too little. Jerky is okay but super expensive. Prunes are not that of much use. Tuna sandwich perhaps next time?
- Get a Smart sim card most Internet in the province is via Smart
- The fucking cord/iPod is hard to charge so get a better setup
- I think ziplocking each day of clothes is easier than putting them in a compression bag
- Lolo's windbreaker is too large and tbh not that effective
- Flash the cow in case it comes too near to your tent
- Check load lifter angle because your pack might not be fitted correctly
- Try not to drink too much soft drinks, just drink normal water
- Ugo--no need to have much water, but before going to the camp site you really need a lot
- Delirium in campsite: take a nap
- Important: Some people don't want your help, they are doing the climb to prove something to themselves, as a social person recognize it
- Don't forget extra batteries for your homies
- When splitting a tent, you have to be near the person you are splitting the tent with, so when you reach the campsite, you can pitch easily

## Tibig: June 6-7 2015

- Gain knowledge of how to cook sinigang: Meat first then tomato/onion then string beans then eggplant
- If you properly precook the meat will last for a week
- Better knowledge of how to cook rice: Whatever the height of the rice is, that should be the height of the water, and you can put plastic on the end
- Clove hitch to the pegs because you can move the pegs around. Or do a taut line on the pegs
- When you don't have a corner grommet you can put a one peso coin or small stone, and then put a clove hitch under the resulting knot
- To form the center of the VSS on a trekking pole, clove hitch a small tying string on it
- Label your cookset with some string or something
- Dont forget pandan for rice
- Blowtorch can be helpful on a marshmallow, then melt all chocolates to make "fondue"
- No black tying strings it is easy to lose
- Check tent campsite for stones/rocks so it is nicer for you to sleep
- Since the tent is freestanding clean out debris before you dismantle it
- Knick knacks as trail food is not that good since the chocolate melts

## Tagapo: June 5 2015

- Notify your contact person
- Charge phone before leaving

## Binacayan/Pamitinan: May 28 2015

- Bring a tarp at the back of the vehicle always
- Bring newspaper and plastic at back of vehicle
- Know how to actually use a shemagh setup
- Practice going on top of stones to conquer your fear of heights
- Sometimes no trail food needed if maikli lang talaga yung distance

## Pinatubo via 4x4: May 23 2015

- Do not leave trek pole in the car

## Sembrano: May 21 2015

- Navigation
- Trail sign seeing
- The ability to fashion tungkods from nowhere
- Use gatorade cover as spoon if there is no spoon

## Binacayan/Pamitinan: May 16-17 2015

- You can cover hydration with malong or insulators to still keep it cold

## Banahaw de Liliw

- Be super praning sa rain, possibly bring more waterproofing than usual
- Shorten trek poles when ascending ala vertical limit
- Refill hydration pack before start of a trek because it is hard to check
- Additional pair of clothes or at least
- Try tent peg reflector baka mawala yung pegs ulit huhu
- Be disciplined sa tent pitching
- This is where you have to be super good at knots because the tempo shelter will not be pogi if knots are bad
- Actually just be good at tempo shelter
- Earthpad, better if yung earthpad na insulator kasi di talaga nababasa yun
- Always wear hipbelt sobrang mabilis mapagod ang shoulder, better talaga if back na lang
- Crossing logs, sit if you have to, low center of gravity
- Mandatory to have gloves
- Rash guards are really for rashes
- When climbing do not wear windbreaker or jacket. just go with baselayer... you will produce heat anyway. just wear your windbreaker when you are at top
- Survival blanket will save your frigging ass so DO NOT RUIN IT
- Know where the damned trowel is at all times

## Makiling

- Trail food
- Easily accessible hydration. Proper way of hydration
- Hindi porket nagawa mo yung 10k ibig sabihin kaya mo na yung climb, iba yun
- Practice cooking at home so you can actually do shit
- Hydrite is your friend
- More than 1 pair of pants mawawarat pants mo
- Number of days+1!

## Bungkol Baka

- Windbreaker near top of pack
- Precooking, do not cook the
- Vegetables rot easily
- We do not wear flip flops because of the risk of ankle sprains
