cooking/freezing-and-thawing.md, before:

## How to Freeze and Thaw Your Food the Right Way

- *Meat.* Air will dry out your meats and cause it to lose flavor, texture, and sometimes its rich color. Wrap them in freezer paper, put the wrapped meat in a plastic bag, and then remove the air before freezing. *The easiest way to remove the air from a bag is just with a plastic straw. You seal the bag around the straw, suck the air out, and then quickly seal the bag.*
- *Fruits and Veggies.* Remove air from the bags, but you want to freeze your fruits and veggies on a tray first.
- *Baked goods.* Never freeze them straight out of the oven. Let them cool naturally first. Then, wrap in plastic and any heat will cause condensation. After wrapping in plastic wrap, wrap them in a layer of aluminum foil.
-  Truly fresh food is grown where you live. If it's grown somewhere else, frozen food can often be fresher. If you don't have access to locally grown food, buying "fresh" food in your grocery store might 1) not taste as good (or as fresh), and 2) not be the greatest source for freezing for later. If you can't buy the freshest food when it's fresh, buying frozen might be your best option. It's often cheaper, easier, and will taste better in the long run.
- The best thing you can do when thawing out your food is give it lots of time to happen naturally. *Extreme temperature changes can cause problems, so your microwave—although quick and easy—is not the ideal route to take.* Leaving it in the refrigerator all day is one effective method. Alternatively you can place your food in a water-tight container and submerge it in cold water. *You'll need to change the water periodically, as it will warm up, but you'll only have to do this every 30-60 minutes until your food has thawed out.*

## The Best Ways to Thaw Frozen Food
[link](http://lifehacker.com/the-best-and-quickest-ways-to-thaw-frozen-food-1567753280)

- When packaging meats for the freezer, protect them from exposure to air. Wrap meats very tightly in either plastic wrap or freezer paper, pressing the wrapping right up against the surface of the meat. Next, wrap another layer of aluminum foil around the meat or seal it inside a zip-top freezer bag. Packaged like this, meat can be kept frozen for at least 3 months.
- The danger zone for bacterial growth in food is between 5C and 60C--a couple of hours at room temp will make sure that the meat is thawed, but it's a field day for bacterial growth as well.

## How to Defrost Chicken
[link](http://www.wikihow.com/Defrost-Chicken)

#### Thawing Chicken in the Refrigerator.
- Place your chicken at the front of the bottom shelf while it defrosts to prevent excess juices from getting on other food in the refrigerator. If your chicken has already been unwrapped, place it in a pan or bowl so that the juices do not leak.
- 1 pound (0.453 kg) of chicken takes 5 hours to defrost in a refrigerator. Thawing a whole chicken in the refrigerator can take more than 24 hours.
- Chicken is thawed when it is no longer covered by frost. If there are ice crystals within the chicken, it needs to be defrosted for a longer period of time.
- Chicken that has been thawed can be safely stored in the fridge for 1-2 days. *Once a chicken has been thawed it should not be refrozen.*

#### Thawing Chicken in the Sink
- Put your chicken in a Ziploc bag if it is not already wrapped. The Ziploc bag will keep bacteria from contaminating the chicken during the thawing process. It will also prevent bacteria from contaminating the sink.
- Place the Ziploc-ed chicken in the bowl and fill the bowl with cold water. Make sure that the top of the chicken is covered. Do not use hot water, it will promote bacterial growth.
- Change water every 30 minutes. *A pound of chicken will be thawed in roughly an hour by using this method.*
- Cook all of the chicken before storing it back in the refrigerator. Raw chicken thawed cannot be stored again while it is still raw.

#### Thawing Chicken in the Microwave

- Unwrap your pieces of chicken. Place them in a microwave-safe bowl so that juices do not leak while the chicken is being thawed.
- Set microwave to defrost. If you do not know how long you should defrost your specific amount of chicken for, defrost the meat for 2 minutes. Let stand for 1 minute and then check the progress. *Make sure that the chicken does not start to cook.*

#### Warnings

- Be sure to wash your hands before and after handling raw chicken.
- Whole chickens do not thaw well in the microwave. You can still use this method for a whole chicken but there is a higher risk of bacterial growth.
- Avoid defrosting chicken at room temperature on your kitchen counters because if you leave your chicken at room temperature for too long there is a high risk of bacterial growth.
- *Be sure not to rinse the chicken before cooking because of risk of bacteria transfer as outlined in latest health guidelines.*

Commit message:

Add freezing stuff from the National Center for Home Food Preservation

cooking/freezing-and-thawing.md, after:

## National Center for Home Food Preservation
[link](http://nchfp.uga.edu/how/freeze/containers.html)

#### Containers for Freezing

- Foods for your freezer must have proper packaging materials to protect their flavor, color, moisture content and nutritive value from the dry climate of the freezer.
- Do not freeze fruits and vegetables in containers with a capacity of over one-half gallon. *Foods in larger containers freeze too slowly.*

Packing materials should have certain characteristics:

- Moisture vapor resistant
- Durable and leakproof
- Not become brittle and crack at low temperatures
- Resistant to oil, grease, and water
- Protect foods from the absorption of off flavors or odors
- Easy to seal
- Easy to mark

Rigid containers made of plastics or glass are suitable for all packs and are good for liquid packs. Cardboard cartons for cottage cheese, ice cream and milk are not sufficiently moisture vapor resistant to be suitable for long term freezer storage, unless they are lined with a freezer bag or wrap.

*Glass jars break at freezer temperatures.* If using glass jars, choose with mouth dual purpose jars made for freezing and canning. If standard canning jars are used for freezing, leave extra headspace to allow for expansion of foods during freezing.

Flexible freezer bags and moisture-vapor resistant wrapping materials such as plastic freezer wrap, freezer paper and heavy-weight aluminum foil are suitable for dry packed products with little or no liquid.

## How to Freeze and Thaw Your Food the Right Way

- *Meat.* Air will dry out your meats and cause it to lose flavor, texture, and sometimes its rich color. Wrap them in freezer paper, put the wrapped meat in a plastic bag, and then remove the air before freezing. *The easiest way to remove the air from a bag is just with a plastic straw. You seal the bag around the straw, suck the air out, and then quickly seal the bag.*
- *Fruits and Veggies.* Remove air from the bags, but you want to freeze your fruits and veggies on a tray first.
- *Baked goods.* Never freeze them straight out of the oven. Let them cool naturally first. Then, wrap in plastic and any heat will cause condensation. After wrapping in plastic wrap, wrap them in a layer of aluminum foil.
-  Truly fresh food is grown where you live. If it's grown somewhere else, frozen food can often be fresher. If you don't have access to locally grown food, buying "fresh" food in your grocery store might 1) not taste as good (or as fresh), and 2) not be the greatest source for freezing for later. If you can't buy the freshest food when it's fresh, buying frozen might be your best option. It's often cheaper, easier, and will taste better in the long run.
- The best thing you can do when thawing out your food is give it lots of time to happen naturally. *Extreme temperature changes can cause problems, so your microwave—although quick and easy—is not the ideal route to take.* Leaving it in the refrigerator all day is one effective method. Alternatively you can place your food in a water-tight container and submerge it in cold water. *You'll need to change the water periodically, as it will warm up, but you'll only have to do this every 30-60 minutes until your food has thawed out.*

## The Best Ways to Thaw Frozen Food
[link](http://lifehacker.com/the-best-and-quickest-ways-to-thaw-frozen-food-1567753280)

- When packaging meats for the freezer, protect them from exposure to air. Wrap meats very tightly in either plastic wrap or freezer paper, pressing the wrapping right up against the surface of the meat. Next, wrap another layer of aluminum foil around the meat or seal it inside a zip-top freezer bag. Packaged like this, meat can be kept frozen for at least 3 months.
- The danger zone for bacterial growth in food is between 5C and 60C--a couple of hours at room temp will make sure that the meat is thawed, but it's a field day for bacterial growth as well.

## How to Defrost Chicken
[link](http://www.wikihow.com/Defrost-Chicken)

#### Thawing Chicken in the Refrigerator.
- Place your chicken at the front of the bottom shelf while it defrosts to prevent excess juices from getting on other food in the refrigerator. If your chicken has already been unwrapped, place it in a pan or bowl so that the juices do not leak.
- 1 pound (0.453 kg) of chicken takes 5 hours to defrost in a refrigerator. Thawing a whole chicken in the refrigerator can take more than 24 hours.
- Chicken is thawed when it is no longer covered by frost. If there are ice crystals within the chicken, it needs to be defrosted for a longer period of time.
- Chicken that has been thawed can be safely stored in the fridge for 1-2 days. *Once a chicken has been thawed it should not be refrozen.*

#### Thawing Chicken in the Sink
- Put your chicken in a Ziploc bag if it is not already wrapped. The Ziploc bag will keep bacteria from contaminating the chicken during the thawing process. It will also prevent bacteria from contaminating the sink.
- Place the Ziploc-ed chicken in the bowl and fill the bowl with cold water. Make sure that the top of the chicken is covered. Do not use hot water, it will promote bacterial growth.
- Change water every 30 minutes. *A pound of chicken will be thawed in roughly an hour by using this method.*
- Cook all of the chicken before storing it back in the refrigerator. Raw chicken thawed cannot be stored again while it is still raw.

#### Thawing Chicken in the Microwave

- Unwrap your pieces of chicken. Place them in a microwave-safe bowl so that juices do not leak while the chicken is being thawed.
- Set microwave to defrost. If you do not know how long you should defrost your specific amount of chicken for, defrost the meat for 2 minutes. Let stand for 1 minute and then check the progress. *Make sure that the chicken does not start to cook.*

#### Warnings

- Be sure to wash your hands before and after handling raw chicken.
- Whole chickens do not thaw well in the microwave. You can still use this method for a whole chicken but there is a higher risk of bacterial growth.
- Avoid defrosting chicken at room temperature on your kitchen counters because if you leave your chicken at room temperature for too long there is a high risk of bacterial growth.
- *Be sure not to rinse the chicken before cooking because of risk of bacteria transfer as outlined in latest health guidelines.*
