# 8 Keys to Eliminating Passive-Aggressiveness (8 Keys to Mental Health): 0
Brandt, Andrea
Introduction: Understanding Passive-Aggressiveness and How It’s Harming You
- *The truth is that everyone occasionally responds in a passive - aggressive way.* We say yes when we want to say no. Because anger is such a shunned emotion in our culture, we’re all at something of a loss when we feel it stirring inside us. We’ll do almost anything rather than show how we feel — angry — and risk creating conflict. What we don’t understand or acknowledge is that anger doesn’t go away if we ignore it.
- *Passive - aggressiveness, also called passive - aggression, is a way to express angry feelings in a seemingly non-hostile way. Since no definition can clarify the meaning as vividly as examples, let’s explore a few scenarios that demonstrate escalating levels of passive - aggression.*
- Well, first of all, as a psychologist who’s worked with thousands of patients, I can honestly say there is no such thing as a bad seed. I repeat : There is no such thing as a bad seed, a bad child, a bad person. Behaving passive - aggressively doesn’t make you bad, nor does the anger that lies beneath your behavior. However, I deliberately chose a child / adolescent to provide my examples of passive - aggression, because the roots of passive - aggression usually lie in our formative years.
- Aggression + Passiveness = Passive - Aggression If one parent is dominant and the other is subservient, children will almost inevitably develop some passive - aggressive tendencies. They may have an excellent role model in the subservient parent, who may be dealing with the dominant partner through passive - aggression. “ We won’t tell your father, ” the passive - aggressive partner says, spending money for childhood treats behind Dad’s back. The child learns that powerful or volatile people can’t be approached directly, but it’s okay to lie to them or keep secrets to get what you want. Almost inevitably, feelings of anger and hostility toward the dominant parent will arise, and children may become engaged in the subservient parent’s dishonest communication and even acts of sabotage.

## Keys:

-  Recognize your anger and accept it as your friend—the messenger that tells you when your boundaries are crossed or your needs are unmet. Anger is a great gift from your emotional self, and taking the time to listen to its message can change your life, whether you are in the grips of passive - aggression yourself or responding to a partner who is.
-  Reconnect your emotions to your thoughts, distinguishing facts from beliefs formed in childhood that may be limiting you and your relationships. *People who suffer from passive - aggressive behavior are often telling people what they think instead of expressing how they feel.* Partners may end up in confusion about how they feel in response. Whichever person you are, you will benefit from getting in touch with your authentic emotions. But before you can do that, you must sort through the unconscious beliefs that are running your life and directing you along the pathway of passive - aggression. Only then can your true emotions be revealed.
-  Listen to your body, using the technique of mindfulness to stay in touch with your sensations and emotions.
-  Set healthy boundaries around your physical and emotional person so that you have a sense of your own identity and command respect for it. Beset by their own passive - aggression, people with this life strategy often have weak emotional boundaries, which are essential to our identity. Their partners also need to find ways to maintain their own stability and safety in the relationship.
-  Communicate assertively to let others know how you feel and what you need and to more fully understand and appreciate the needs and boundaries of significant others. Aggression is all indirection, and when you don’t ask for what you need, the odds of getting it are greatly reduced.
-  Reframe conflict—understanding that, like anger, conflict is a useful tool for resolving differences in ways that create more intimacy. Like anger, conflict has an undeservedly bad reputation. Acknowledging our differences and resolving them in honest but compassionate conflict is a way to increase the closeness of our relationships and ensure that the pools of unexpressed anger remain empty. It may be the only way to enable our relationships to grow stronger.
-  Interact using mindfulness, taking responsibility for meeting the challenges of passive-aggressiveness with a mindful approach to others. Whether intentionally or not, those who engage in passive - aggression inflict a lot of damage on their partners. Taking responsibility for that hurt and learning to be mindful of your own feelings and those of your partner during interactions can bring new sensitivity, empathy, and consciously nurturing actions to your relationship.
-  Disable the enabler, identifying the characteristics that lead you to conspire in your partner’s passive-aggressive tango so that you can learn another dance. In reality, passive - aggression is a tango between the person who adopts this strategy and the partner who chooses to accept it. In fact, partners are often in need of healing for childhood wounds that make their relationships more precarious. With this key, you will learn to replace accommodation with a healthy expression of negative feelings.

## Key 1 : Recognize Your Hidden Anger

KEY 1: Recognize Your Hidden Anger
Anger plays a central role in passive - aggressive behavior. For those who typically behave in this style — saying yes, for example, when they really mean no — the anger is deeply hidden.
Expressions of anger are widely unacceptable in our society, and so most of us learn as children that we have to keep our anger “ under control ” at whatever cost. We are encouraged to suppress how we feel for the sake of keeping the peace with others. We associate this emotion with a loss of control, violence, guilt, and so on. We may even be told, “ Don’t be angry ! ” — as if the feeling itself were wrong. In time, if we have suppressed it enough, we may not even recognize when we’re feeling anger because we’re hiding it behind other, more acceptable emotions and rationales. Most of us reach adulthood either anger - phobic or afraid of confrontation. We simply don’t know how to deal with anger. And it’s certainly an uncomfortable feeling to experience in our bodies. This is especially true for people who have developed passive - aggressive strategies for dealing with life. Anger — hidden, suppressed anger — is at the core of their behavior pattern. People who are long - term partners in a passive - aggressive relationship often have this trait, too. In a partnership where neither side knows how to express anger, real communication quickly comes to a standstill.

Myth : You have to be nice or people won’t like you. Reality : If you’re always nice, people may start to wonder what you’re really thinking, and begin to mistrust you. Myth : Anger is dangerous — you’ll lose control and hurt somebody or do and say something you’ll regret. Reality : If you learn how to respond to anger, you can take the danger out of it. If you let it build, you’re more likely to explode. Myth : Anger brings up issues that are too painful and uncomfortable to think about.
Reality : Unless you address these deep - seated issues, you will experience even more pain over time, and your relationships will suffer. Myth : There’s no upside to anger — it’s all bad news. Reality : By discovering why you’re feeling angry, you can identify your needs and make mindful choices about what you want to say and do. Myth : Anger is the death of relationships — and I don’t want my partner to leave me. Reality : When you examine your anger and express it mindfully, you open the door to better connections and greater intimacy in your relationships.
I would like to suggest here that anger is really the key that opens the door to intimacy. When we allow ourselves to feel our anger and assess its message, we learn important information about what we need to feel happy and loved. By sharing this information with our partner, we show our vulnerability — and that can feel dangerous — but it is also an invitation to that person to get to know us more deeply.
Do you ( or does your partner ) — • Withhold praise, attention, or positive feedback when someone else deserves or asks for it ? • Fail to follow through when a request is made ? • Stall when an important issue needs to be resolved ? • Withhold intimacy as a way to punish ? • Engage in sabotaging behavior ? • Respond with minimal words during important discussions ? Examples of this are “ Mm - hmm, ” “ I don’t know, ” “ Fine ! ” and “ Whatever ! ” • Respond in sarcastic ways about life, herself or himself, or others ? • Feel frustrated, disappointed, or irritable a lot, sometimes without reaching the point of being angry ? • View most situations negatively, even when many aspects of them are going well ? • Frequently make small, negative comments that seem to undermine someone else’s self - esteem ? • Feel depressed frequently or for a length of time ? • Never say no ? ( Or always say yes ? )
As we grow up, we become more and more able to take care of our basic physical needs, but our emotional needs remain the same. We need to be safe and accepted, to be loved and to belong, to feel good about ourselves, to live with purpose, and to direct our lives toward our highest potential. When one of our needs is not being met, a built - in mechanism is triggered to let us know. This is the role of our emotions — anger, in particular. Our feelings serve as messengers, arising to deliver valuable information about our well - being.
By identifying your anger and exploring the feeling, you can hear the message it is sending and use it to improve your situation.
More often than not, the strategy of avoiding anger and confrontation can be traced back to childhood experiences.
The anger - avoidant family type basically never expresses anger at all or acknowledges conflict, for that matter. Those who like to please others tend to come from these types of families. Only happy, safe feelings are displayed, and nothing “ bad ” is ever discussed. • The anger - expressive family type is, on the surface, more dangerous. Anger is freely thrown around, and children learn to manipulate by being angry to get what they want. Often, love is shown through conflict or an explosive communication style. • The anger - healthy family type reveals that relationships can have conflict and love. An argument or disagreement can occur, but at the same time trust, closeness, and affection are maintained. People respect one another and work together toward the mutual goal of resolving a problem and strengthening the relationship.
In this exercise, you describe how each of your parents or parenting figures handled their anger, as well as any messages they may have directly or indirectly given to you about how to handle your own. 1. How did your mother handle her anger ? What messages did her words or behaviors send you about how to handle your own ? 2. How about your father ? What modeling or influential messages about anger did you receive from him ? 3. Were there other significant people who demonstrated a way of dealing with anger that you adopted ? What did you learn from them that shaped the patterns you use today ?
Physical Clues Anger, like all emotions, is a form of energy. The proof of this is in your body’s reaction. Think back to the last time you got angry. Did you feel passionate, alive, invigorated ?
• Tension • Stiffening of something in your body ( jaw, neck, hands ) • Feeling as if your heart has “ dropped ” • Lack of appetite • Headache • Shaking or trembling • Feeling hot in the face or neck
Emotional Clues • You want to get away from the situation • You feel depressed, irritated, or guilty • You are anxious around the other person • You are overly critical or sarcastic when dealing with the person • You engage in sabotaging or hurtful behaviors • You purposely interfere with progress at work or in your relationships Mental Clues • Hostile self - talk • Fantasies of aggression or revenge • Obsessive internal thoughts about the issue • Ongoing arguments with others about the issue
When you have symptoms like this, give yourself a few quiet minutes to explore your environment. What’s going on around you ? Who are you with ? Have they said something that made you angry ? What was it, and why was it a trigger ? Many of the issues that make us angry have been with us from childhood. If, as a child, you were made to feel stupid or ugly or lazy — pick your adjective — you are likely to continue to respond with anger when someone or something awakens those old negative memories. They’re painful, of course, but stay with them long enough to identify them and consider their source.
To build a strong relationship, we need to know what buttons our partner pushes. It’s the only way we can have the kind of honest discussion that can help both of us deal with each other more sensitively. Without some emotional discomfort, followed by truthful self - examination, change and growth are impossible.
Most people who are involved in passive - aggressive relationships describe their feelings as confused. Over time, this person who seemed so likable and easygoing, so pleasant and agreeable, is somehow provoking them to an anger they may at first ignore or fail to recognize. As time goes by, the pool of hidden anger builds, and inevitably, it is expressed, sometimes in irrational outbursts. In response to a request, for example, the passive - aggressive party may say a half - hearted “ Sure, ” and suddenly the other person is shouting with rage. Beyond confusion and anger, partners may feel guilty about their actions and feelings and even start to question their own emotional stability.
1. Find a quiet place where you can be alone and safe for at least 15 minutes. Relax — uncrossed arms and legs, shoulders down, feet flat on the floor. 2. Take a deep breath to a slow count of three and exhale, counting again : 1, 2, 3. Repeat until you feel calm and the urgent business of the day leaves your mind. 3. Focus on your interactions with your partner over the last day or two. The interactions that come first to mind are likely to be the ones that are still troubling you. Why ? Were you uncertain about the meaning of your partner’s behavior ? Did it seem hostile or cruel, even if your partner’s demeanor was pleasant ? 4. Stay with your memory of the incident. See if you feel anger rising at the recollection. 5. Now examine how you responded : • Did you agree or say yes because it was easier than arguing ? • Did you promise to do something and quickly forget about it ? • Did you forgive her or him, brush it off, and quickly forget about it ? • Did you feel the need to walk away ? • Did you reply in a subtle, humorous, or sarcastic way ?
KEY 2: Reconnect Your Emotions to Your Thoughts
While our physical skeletons are growing, we are also building a psychological skeleton, a framework we will use to judge situations and make decisions throughout our lives — or at least until we take the time to examine our thoughts and beliefs and see whether they are realistic.
Once the groundwork has been laid by belief systems that cause a child to respond in a passive - aggressive way, it isn’t long before they are in a passive - aggressive loop, which affects all of the person’s interactions. These thoughts and beliefs intervene between what we actually experience and our response to those events. American psychologist Albert Ellis ( 1913 – 2007 ) developed an A + B = C model to explain this. In the equation A + B = C, • A = the Activating event • B = your Beliefs • C = the emotional Consequences
When the child Linda was disciplined, her parents managed their anger and tried to explain why what she did was unacceptable. They talked with her about how she could do better and expressed their confidence that she would. In other words, they focused on the behavior, not the child. Because of her childhood experience, Linda is likely to see conflict as a time to sit down and discuss what went wrong and how it can be corrected.
We cut ourselves off from painful and uncomfortable feelings, not just anger but also loss, fear, anxiety — “ What, me, worry ? ” — and all forms of sadness. We do our best to present that serene and positive personality so admired — and richly rewarded — in our culture. Unfortunately, when we cut ourselves off from our negative feelings, we also diminish our ability to feel all the positive ones that might give us cause for good cheer : love, joy, affection, satisfaction. Eventually, we become disconnected from our feelings to the point that we don’t know what we really feel, and we therefore communicate only our thoughts — often irrational thoughts — about how we should feel or believe we feel. This is a very common side effect of passive - aggressiveness.
It’s amazing how many households, how many families, function day to day with no expression of feelings. Besides anger, we also struggle to ignore or hide our anxiety, our fear, our sadness. Faulty thinking hides our true emotions from us. Here are some typical patterns of faulty thinking among people with passive - aggressive personalities : Self - Flawed or Telescopic Thinking Nothing I do is good enough. I am inadequate / unworthy / unlovable ( choose your adjective ). I always feel like a failure. There’s something wrong with me — I don’t care what people say about my positive traits. Perfectionist Thinking I have to do things perfectly in order to be satisfied. I can’t accept any flaws or failures.
Blurred - Boundary, Self - Victimizing Thinking I might feel that I’m overworked or unappreciated, but I will never say no. My husband / wife / boss / friend expects too much from me. It’s just one demand after another, and they never seem to see how tired and stressed I am. People - Pleasing Thinking I want everyone to like me. The more approval I get from others, the better I feel about myself. Pessimistic / Resistance Thinking I’m overwhelmed by the amount of work and stress in my life, and it seems I’m always fighting for the smallest thing. I often despair that the situation will ever get better. This is life — at least mine. Helpless Thinking This is not the life I was hoping for. I’m running from one end of the day to another, taking care of the house, the kids, the boss. Everybody dumps on me, and I resent it, but what can I do ?
By doing everything the other person asks, however, they tend to create reservoirs of guilt and eventually anger in their partners rather than the gratitude they expected. In the meantime, their needs continue to be unmet — they haven’t asked for anything, so they surely won’t receive anything. And deep inside, their own reservoirs of anger and resentment grow. Nobody is truly happy in this situation.
When irrational beliefs created in childhood are determining your adult behavior, you may find that your mind and its thoughts are your own worst enemy. You can use this exercise to identify the thoughts that are sabotaging your happiness, success, and well - being. That knowledge can help you change your mind from enemy to friend — and improve your life.
KEY 3: Listen to Your Body
Emotions are a gift that tells us how our environment is affecting us. They let us know when our boundaries are being violated or our needs are being left unmet so that we can make things better. If we ignore our emotions — and that’s a big feature of the passive - aggressive loop — then things stay the way they are : bad.
People feel guilty because they think they’ve done something wrong. Shame is a feeling that comes about when people believe they themselves are wrong. Because children can’t separate their feelings from their self - image, when they experience bad feelings, they come to the conclusion that they themselves are bad. So, while guilt arises when you have made a mistake and can fix it, shame develops when you see yourself as the mistake — believing that you are bad. Perhaps because they don’t know how to deal with the tears, parents often encourage their children to “ stop crying. ” Whatever has made them unhappy, the children are told, “ is nothing to cry about. ”
Like the body, the psyche knows what needs to happen to heal emotional wounds. When we stuff them away in the bag, however, that healing process cannot begin, and the longer they fester, the more harm they can do us. Whenever similar events happen in our lives, the old emotions emerge and cause us pain — trying to get our attention — until we resolve them. They want to be healed. As long as we keep suppressing them, they will continue to hurt.
An important first step in the healing process is to sit with emotions — especially anger — long enough to hear what they want to tell you. I’ll be asking you to do just that. Believe me, I know how hard this will be for people stuck in the passive - aggressive loop.
Mindfulness is a practice in which we intentionally focus on the present : on where we are and what we see, hear, think, and feel. Although, as human beings, our minds often drift to the past or the future, in mindfulness, we stay in the present. The idea is not to be preoccupied or distracted by anything that leads us away from the intensity of the moment. Another important element of mindfulness is to observe our thoughts and feelings without judging them — that way we avoid a reaction that could lead us away from the present because of our discomfort with the feelings. Buddhists use mindfulness to reach a higher consciousness. They want to avoid “ going through the motions ” without paying much attention to what’s going on around them. Buddhist practice also includes looking at our present situation with curiosity : What are we feeling, and why ? Many people operate at an entirely different level. Obsessed by the past and anxious about the future, they may hardly ever catch the full impact of what is actually going on now. When you go through life unaware of what’s happening inside you, you can lose sight of how you might be contributing to your own problems. On the one hand, you will ignore your anger and other feelings, but you will also miss out on a lot of life’s pleasures and joys.
Sensations are not the same as emotions. While sensations are physical responses, emotions are states of consciousness. Sensations and emotions may come at the same time, but that doesn’t mean they are the same thing. For example, if you’re angry, you might feel a fast heartbeat or a headache. Tightness in your chest is a sensation ; anxiety is an emotion.
I’ve divided emotions into two groups : ( 1 ) the positive emotions ( the ones we find most comfortable ), like joy and love, as well as the negative emotions ( the ones we generally dislike ), such as anger and fear. If you’ve been engaged in passive - aggressive behavior, your knowledge of positive emotions may have been limited by your suppression of the negative ones. That’s because when we cut ourselves off from feeling certain emotions, we limit our ability to feel them all.
Particularly in relationships where you and the person who has a passive - aggressive personality have agreed on the problem, you may be able to help your partner identify feelings and examine their sources. Body language is a useful tool here — although it provides only one message, and not necessarily the message your partner will recognize or act on. I recently saw a play, Seminar, about a writing class in which the teacher disparages everything his young would - be authors do. Their body language is full of anger, but they don’t express it to the teacher. Instead, they rail on and on with each other without going to the source. And oh, yes, they go to bed with him, too. An entirely different physical message.
KEY 4: Set Healthy Boundaries
Blurred boundaries are among the faulty ways of thinking adopted by people with passive - aggression, as we learned in Key 2. We have also seen, in Key 3, how our emotions are messengers from the front lines of our boundaries, telling us something is wrong. In our story, Karen is getting messages from her emotions — her confusion about how Ray feels, her sense of being unwanted, and finally her anger — about boundary violations. But she’s not yet listening.
The exercise I do involving physical boundaries often reflects something about ego boundaries, as well : the amount of intimacy a person comfortably accepts. A healthy ego includes private spaces where only some people are admitted and only under some circumstances. We might tell our best friends things about our background we would be unlikely to share with neighbors or coworkers. In other words, healthy emotional boundaries shift according to the person we encounter and our relationship. Say you have a big presentation coming up for your job. Its success or failure will have a major impact on the company’s profits and your own career progress. To your best friend, you might admit that you’re scared to death and won’t be able to eat until it’s over. To your colleague, you might say that you know a lot is riding on your effort and ask him to wish you luck. To your boss, you might say that you’ve worked very hard in preparation and you’re ready to go.
A boundary would more likely say, “ I am cautious about engaging in too much intimacy with colleagues, and I am watchful to see if emotional connection might interfere with our professional tasks. ”
Most of us have a self - image that reflects what we value in ourselves and how we see our role in our family, our workplace, or society in general. A woman who takes great pride in the appearance of her house will be sensitive to any criticism, while a woman who sees herself primarily as a mother might not care what you say about her house — but don’t say a negative word about the kids ! Still another woman may love her kids but have her self - image invested in her career. If she loses her job, the kids may not be a consolation.
You don’t protect your private space. Although it may make you uncomfortable, you allow people to stand much closer than you’d like, to touch you in a familiar way, to enter your personal areas — rooms, drawers, computer files. People who hug you may feel your resistance, but you say nothing. • You dislike being alone. Faced with the prospect of being at home on your own for an evening, you’re likely to call friends and invite yourself along on an outing. Anything to have company. • You reveal too much. It’s okay to share your feelings with a close friend, but the clerk at the drugstore probably doesn’t need to review your love life with you. • You get caught up in other people’s feelings. If your brother loses his job, you feel the anguish and distress. Sometimes you’re so caught up in other people’s troubles that you are more distressed than they are. The key here is that you’re not really sharing their feelings. You’re playing out a drama, and they’re just providing the script. • You neglect your own needs for the sake of others. Anything someone asks — you’re ready to do it, even when it conflicts with what you need. In our introductory example, Ray asks Karen to stay, so she does, even though she’s hurting in this situation. • You engage in sex when you don’t want to — even on a first meeting. When the other partner wants sex, you feel that you have to comply. You’re likely to have sex on a first date — a relationship is either sexual or it doesn’t matter. • You confuse sexual attraction and love. You’re constantly falling in “ love at first sight ” because you can’t distinguish between love and infatuation. • You tolerate abuse. You’re afraid to resist, so you let a spouse or partner abuse you emotionally or even physically. • You are easily persuaded by one religious group or another.
• Clarity. You are clear in your own mind where you end and others begin, and those who know you are equally clear. • Protection. Your boundaries make you feel safe. You understand that you are in control of how close others get to you, and they know what lines they should not cross. • Flexibility. You’re confident enough to change your boundaries and limits when you feel the situation calls for it, giving you a sense of freedom. You don’t build walls to shut people out.
• What kind of physical proximity is comfortable for me ? With friends or family ? With coworkers ? With strangers ? • What kind of touching is acceptable ? With friends or family ? With coworkers ? With strangers ? • What kind of barrier do I want around my possessions and personal spaces ? Under lock and key ? Only touch what you can see ? Available with permission ? What’s mine is yours ? • How do I feel about sexual intimacy ? You’ll have to wait a while ? Only after an emotional relationship is established ? I need to feel trust ? Whenever you’re ready, I’m available ? 3. What other physical boundary issues come up for you as you do this exercise ? If there are particular concerns in your relationship, raise them here. For example, you might want your partner to use a gentler tone of voice when you are discussing problems. 4. Sit with your list for a few minutes. Does this honestly reflect your boundaries ? If you’ve had trouble setting boundaries, consider what might make you feel more comfortable.
1. Find a place where you can be quiet for a half hour or so. 2. Using pen and paper or your favorite digital device, make a list of recent issues in your relationship. • When was the last time you felt angry because of something your partner said or did ? What happened ? • When was the last time you were hurt by something your partner said or did ? What happened ? • If you could change one thing about your partner’s behavior, what would it be ? • If there were one thing that could make you happier in your relationship, what would it be ?
Setting limits lets partners know that you understand that they are not giving you the treatment you deserve. Be specific about what bothers you, specific about your expectations, clear about your intent and willingness to help them. Try to follow the biblical rule : Hate the sin, not the sinner. In Ray’s case, he’s not rude. His behavior is.
Keep in mind that — regardless of whether passive - aggression is an issue — some things remain true : • People are responsible for how they feel, even if they choose to deny those feelings. • People have to own the choices they make, good and bad. • People need to understand and communicate their needs and boundaries in order to build a sound relationship.
KEY 5: Communicate Assertively
If you’re trying to stop your own passive - aggression, you will discover ways to begin clearly communicating your needs without fearing conflict. For partners, this key will help you to develop clear, positive ways of communicating with the person who exhibits passive - aggression. You will learn strategies for communicating in a productive way that won’t spark their defensive behavior.
Aggressive communicators are : • Reactive and threatening. They “ snap ” easily, storming into and out of rooms, and escalating to rage when someone disagrees with them. Their posture, tone of voice, and words are intended to intimidate. • Critical and blaming. When something has gone wrong, they attack, blame, and denigrate. • Overbearing. They speak loudly and interrupt often in order to “ be heard. ” • Domineering. Winning is everything. They won’t quit until the other person gives up.
Passive communicators are : • Apologetic. They say “ sorry ” after expressing even the smallest need and make excuses for other people who treat them poorly. • Retiring. Their body language is tentative ; they make poor eye contact and speak timidly. • Confused. Ask them for an opinion, and they’ll fumble for words until someone picks up the conversational ball. • People pleasing. It’s hard to make a mutual decision with passive communicators. To the question, “ What do you want ? ” they reply, “ Whatever you want. ”
Passive - aggressive communicators are : • Mutterers. They speak so softly they can’t be heard, or they mutter under their breath. If you ask, they said “ nothing. ” • Double messages. While their words say one thing, their expression says something else. The face is smiling, but the words sound mean.
• Sarcastic. They hide behind sarcasm. If you say you don’t want to go out, they’ll respond, “ You must be so tired. ” Their tone conveys anything but sympathy.
Assertive communicators are : • Nonreactive and respectful. They don’t respond to anger with anger ; instead, they state their needs and feelings clearly. • Confident but collaborative. They stand up for themselves, but they also want to have a true meeting of minds. • Good listeners. They appreciate that other people may have different opinions, and they want to listen. • Control. They make eye contact, have a relaxed posture, and speak with a calm voice.
Although it may seem to be a word that belongs on another continent in another century, dignity is still important to people. Whatever else you lose in a win - lose situation, you also lose your self - respect. For people stuck in a passive - aggressive loop, loss of self - respect can underscore low self - esteem and victimhood. For their partners, it is crucial to retain dignity in a situation that may often feel confusing and breed anger.
1. Think about your partner, friend, family member, or coworker. 2. What has her or his mood been like in recent days ? 3. What’s going on in this person’s life that might be making her or him happy or sad, anxious or angry ? 4. How are you contributing ? 5. What could you do or say to improve this person’s situation ?
If you’ve ever been in a group discussion, you may have noticed this. Someone is so eager to be heard that she’s not following the flow of the conversation. While she’s rehearsing her statement — in her head — the conversation drifts in an entirely different direction. Once she gets to speak, she’s really off point. Or she may say the same thing someone else said while she was lost in her own thoughts. This happens in two - sided conversations as well. Hearing is a passive activity. Our ears are biologically open, and sound waves pass through to register on nerve endings in the inner ear. Listening is much more active and holistic. Besides the ears, it engages the thinking brain, memories, and feelings. Listening and empathy are good partners for a chicken - or - egg argument. You can grow empathy by listening, and empathy will help you become a better listener. Here’s how effective listening works.
Setting some ground rules for communication will give you an enforcement tool to keep your passive - aggressive friends from sliding back into the comfortable ( for them ) routine of sarcasm, gossip, and guilt.
KEY 6: Reframe Conflict
4. Don’t punish the other person.
5. Stick to the subject.

