## [Heather Payne: How to Turn Your Side Project Into a Full-Time Gig](http://99u.com/videos/21001/heather-payne-how-to-turn-your-side-project-to-a-full-time-gig)

Ladies Learning Code. HackerYou. How to Create & Harness Momentum.

Commit to a timeline publicly. Nail the business model (I suggest not doing things for free).

Know when to say yes and no. As the founder, you are the keeper and funder of your vision.

Let your team find you. People who come to you are more passionate. Work that takes months then takes days.

Never slow down. You constantly have to be fueling it. It's the tricky thing about doing something thing.

## [Simon Sinek: Leadership Is Not a Rank, It's a Decision.](http://99u.com/videos/20272/simon-sinek-why-leaders-eat-last)

Who would risk their lives for others so they may survive? He gave me the same answer: "they would have done it for me". In the military they give medals to those who sacrifice so others may gain. In business we give bonuses to people who are willing to sacrifice others so that we many gain. Would you not rather work in an organization where other people you don't know are willing to sacrifice so that you may survive?

It's not even life, we don't even want to give up credit. They aren't born, they are made. A human animal has mechanisms inside it that want it to survive. If you want someone else to do something, you offer a positive or negative incentive. We do it in the same way, we have chemicals to do things in the interest of us. All of the feelings we have are chemicals. 

Endorphins, dopamine, seratonin, oxytocin. E/D, you don't need somene's help to do thim. Endorphins mask physical pain (runner's high). We're social animals. We have to do things together, this is just how we're designed. These chemicals are designed to make this happen.

We're not the strongest, we're not the fastest, but the human is made for one thing: endurance. We can track an animal for hours and hours. We also become addicted to it in the same way we get addicted to exercise.

By the way, laughing also produces endorphins. Your body literally convulses in pain, you get to a point where you laugh sometimes, that's when the endorphins run out.

Dopamine is the feeling you get when you accomplish something you want to accomplish. This is why you want crossing off stuff on to-do lists. "Yes!" That's dopamine. The purpose of dopamine is so we got shit done. We get dopamine when we eat, and we do the behavior we want to get dopamine. This is why we are told to write down your goals. We are visually oriented, you have to see the goal so we can stay focused. This is why you need tangible goals. Without tangible goals, you think "what do I have to do again?"

Dopamine is highly highly highly addictive. Other things that release dopamine: alcohol, nicotine, gambling, cellphone. Symptoms of dopamine addiction in tech: shortness of attention and being easily distracted. We can also be addicted to performance in companies. Dopamine is dangerous and addictive if unbalanced: it ruins relationships.

You don't need anyone else to get D and E. But it's S and O that makes our society great. It's because of S and O that leaders fulfill their responsibility.

In the ancient times, there are dangers. But we survive when we work together. When we're surrounded by people we trust, we work together to protect each other. Inside our organizations, the dangers we face are not constant, they are variable. They are the decisions of leadership as to how we are safe when we work.

When we stand together, we can more easily face the dangers outside. When we're apart, we expend more energy defending against each other. If you have to worry about politics, or someone stealing your credit, or your boss not having your back, your energy is not invested in your business or your products or your work or your creativity, but only in keeping yourself safe.

The responsibilites of leadership: 1) who gets in and who doesn't get in. 2) how big is the circle of safety. Do we make an inner circle or do we extend it to the most outermost edges of the organization so the most junior person feels like they belong.

Serotonin: Leadership chemical. It is responsible for the feelings of pride and status. This is why we have awards and commencement. This is why we have a graduation ceremony because printing out the same certificate isn't really the same. This is why you feel great. You and your parents both feel an intense feeling when you are successful. This is why we also thank the people who "we could not have done this without you". Great teams don't just want to win the trophy, they want to "win one for the coach" or "make our parents proud". It raises your confidence and make others feel good.

The problem is, we can trick serotonin. We live in a materialistic culture and any signs of showing off your wealth raises your status. This is why they put the logos on the outside. You actually feel your confidence rising when you have your designer shoes. Nothing really happens, though. This is why you keep on accumulating your material goods but you don't feel successful because there is no relationship. You tricked it, you gamed it.

S is the leadership chemical. The value of group living is that you trust someone else to tell you if there is trouble when you sleep at night. If you don't trust the guy then you can't sleep at night. This is why we evolved to be hierarchical animals, we are constantly judging who is the alpha or the dominant personality in the room. Might be physical, might be talent, might be courage, but the alphas are judged according to the industry. If you're nervous to meet someone, you're not the alpha. If they're nervous, you're the alpha.

So we're constantly judging who is the alpha. When we know someone is the alpha, we step back first. Alphas get first choice of meat and first choice of mate. Good system, at least no one gets an elbow in the face. This is why we want to constantly raise our status, because people are willing to offer favors to others. This is why no one has a problem that someone who outranks us to have whatever they have. It's awesome if you're the alpha.

But alpha comes at a cost. We expect that when danger threatens us that the person who is stronger, better fed, and more confident to actually run across and protect us. The cost of leadership is self-interest. If you're not willing to give up your perks when it matters, then you probably shouldn't get promoted. Leadership comes at a cost. You don't get to do less work when you are senior, you have to do more work. The more work you have to do is to put yourself at risk to look out for others. That is the anthropological definition of what a leader is. 

This is why we're so offended by these banker boys who pay themselves astronomical salaries. It has nothing to do with the number. It is because they have violated the deep-seated social contract. We know that they made all that money and allowed their people to be sacrificed. In fact they may have sacrificed their people to get the money. We don't have a problem giving Mandela $150M or Mother Theresa $250M because it's not about the money the make. We are viscerally offended because they are supposed to sacrifice themselves for us, not us for them. This is why we are angry and don't trust them. They failed.

O is the best chemical of all. It is the feeling of love, trust, and friendship. It is why we like spending time with friend even though we don't do shit with them, we just like being with them. It makes you feel safer when you know someone's got your back.

We get this by physical contact, and why shaking hands matters. Relationships are not natural, they are about feeling safe, it's human, and one of the ways we know a relationship is safe is because of physical touch.

You also get oxytocin from human generosity. This is giving your energy without expecting anything in return. Not money. We are impressed more by people donating time than money. As human beings, we put a premium on time because it is an equal an unredeemable commodity. We put a premium on people who give us their time and energy. A leader who says "I'll pay for something for you" is not a leader. A leader who sits down next yto you and says "how can I help you" is a leader.

More time and energy expended, the better you feel. This is why e-mail doesn't work. It's too easy. Leaders are the ones who give us their time and their energy. Not their money, it doesn't work. This is how you get oxytocin. Doing nice things for people. Sacrificing something you never get back.

People who get the receiving end of the generosity also feel good. Even witnessing acts of human generosity is also good. And the more good things you do, the better you do. It's why happy people and couples live longer. It's not addiction, it just feels frigging great.

This is why you think fast marriages are weird because you instinctively know that you cannot really know a person in a span of a week. Things take time, and this is why dating starts by doing small shit, and slowly making things bigger.

Email is fantastic for exchanging information. Emotional stuff, don't reply via email.

This is why leadership is very difficult because you don't have enough to give to everyone, and you can't. You have to make sure to trust others and that you know that others trust others. As the CEO, you know your people by names and everyone knows their homies by name, and when the people on the outside feel safe, they will also invite the cx in, and the cx also feel safe.

Cortisol. Cortisol is the feeling of stress and anxiety. We share this anxiety with the mammals. Cortisol is designed to keep us alive. It makes us paranoid and our senses hyper intuned. When you work in a social environment, if other people sense that you get nervous, then they get nervous. They didn't hear anything, they just got freaked out.

This is why when you hear about potential layoffs, you become paranoid. When you wake up in the middle of the night, you talk to the person next to you. When we go to a place which doesn't make us feel safe, we have cortisol dripping out, it makes us paranoid, and it inhibits our oxytocin. "We don't care about each other, because we are too busy trying to protect ourselves."

Leadership is not a rank, not a position. Leadership is a decision, leadership is a choice. It has nothing to do with your position in your organization. If you decide to look out for other people, then you have become a leader. It's your willingness to sacrifice for someone so they feel safe that makes you a leader.

The more we look after each other, the safer we feel and the safer we belong.

## Brené Brown: Why Your Critics Aren't The Ones Who Count

I'm a researcher and I study connection, vulnerability, love, and I realize why you are my tribe. I think it is because design is a function of connection. There is nothing more vulnerable than creativity, and what is art if it is not love? So it made sense for me to be here.

I know what the perspiration feels like when I create. I will talk about the perspiration that no one talks about, and it's the perspiration from fear. So I know about sweaty creatives. Sometimes when you hear something when you're ready to hear it.

I did a Ted Talk and it went viral and the marching orders from the therapist/husband was to not read the comments online, and I read the comments online lol. The comments weren't about work, they were about me. They were the things that creative people play in their mind and they give up doing what they do. What would you try if you knew someone would never say it about you?

"Of course she embraces imperfection, look at how she looks." "I'm sorry for her kids." "More research, less botox." Just mean personal attacks that up until that moment had inspired me to stay very small in my life and in my career. So I watched Downtown Abbey for 8 hours. So I research who the president was during the Downtown Abbey time and I see this quote abotu Theodore Roosevelt and it's a quote about a speech he gave:

> It's not the critic who counts. It's not the man that points out how the strong man stumbles or where the doer of deeds could have done it better. The credit belongs to the person who is actually in the arena, whose face is marred with blood and sweat and dust, who at the best in the end knows the triumph of high achievement, and who at worst, if he fails, he fails daring greatly.

It is not about winning, not about losing, it's about showing up and being seen.

This is what I want to be. I want to create. I want to make things that didn't exist before. I want to show up and be seen in my work and in my life. If you want to show up and be seen, there is only one guarantee: you will get your ass kicked. That is the only guarantee and certainty you have. Especially if you commit to creating in your life.

If courage is a value that we hold, this is a consequence.

The third thing is a new philosophy about criticism: "If you're not in the arena, also getting your ass kicked, I'm not even considering your feedback." If you have constructive feedback, then let's do it. But if you're in the cheap seats, not putting yourself on the line, and just talking about how I can do it better, I am in no way interested about your feedback.

This (backstage) is where we sweat. This is where I dream about when I come up. And the fear is this: "I'm scared", a lot of self-doubt, comparison, anxiety, uncertainty, and what do most people do when they walk into the arena, you armore up. But god that stuff is heavy. And that stuff is suffocating. And when you armor up against vulnerability, you shut yourself up.

When you armor up, in this hallway, you shut yourself off from everything you do and you love, because vulnerability is certainly a part of fear and self-doubt and uncertainty and shame, but it's also the birthplace of love, joy, belonging, trust, empathy, creativity, and innovation. Without vulnerability, you cannot create.

So what I think you are asked to do is to walk to this hall, get to the top of the stairs, and get naked. Get real. Put yourself out there and so people can see what you've made.

When we walk out, we see lots of seats, lots of people, but we focus on the critics. I used to think the best way to put your work out in the world is to make sure the critics are not in the arena. But you have no control over who is in the arena. And the best way I have found is to know that they are there, and to know exactly what they're going to say to you. You know the three seats that will always be taken are shame, scarcity, and comparison.

Shame, completely universal human emotion, we all have it. It's the one that whispers, "you're not enough." Shame always has a seat.

The other seat that's always taken is scarcity. "What am I doing that's original? Everyone is already doing this. 150 people are doing it who are better trained than I am. What am I contributing. Does this really matter?" 

The third seat is comparison. Comparison is a nightmare. It is always there.

The fourth seat is left open, is it a teacher, a parent, a shitty ex-coworker? The thing is I don't care what people think sends a huge red flag to me. We are hardwired for connection, when we stop caring what people think, we lose our capacity for connection, when we get defined by what people think, we lose our capacity to be vulnerable. Not caring what people think is its own kind of hustle.

Rather than locking people out of the arena, I would rather reserve seats for them. Reserve a seat, take the critics to lunch, and tell them I see you, I hear you, but I'm going to show up and do this anyway, but I've got a seat for you and you're welcome to come, and I'm not interested in your feedback.

To me, if you're going to spend your life in the arena, there is a couple of things you need. *The first is a clarity of values.* I know I can screw this completely up, but I don't have a choice, because courage is my value, and I have to do this. Whether it is successful or not is irrelevant.

The other is you got to have at least one person in your life who is willing to pick you up and dust you up when you fail, which hopefully you will because if you're not failing you're not showing up, and say "man, that sucked, but you're brave, and let's get you clean up and let's get in". They should have great seats in your arena.

The last part is the world keeps going whether you know it or not. The critics in the arena are there, and they're there whether you do it or not. The people who have the most courage are the people who are very clear who the critics are. The last thing which I think is the hardest is that one of these seats needs to be reserved for you. When we look up and we're putting our idea and we're putting our design forwards, the biggest critic is usually yourself.

Definitely me. I have never watched either of those Ted Talks because what would it serve me? We're so self-critical and one of the things that happens is there is an ideal of what you're supposed to be and we orphan the parts of ourselves that don't fit with our ideal supposed to be. What it leaves is it just leaves the critic. 

Reserved in this seat is this: Where we came from, how we started, our families, the lost years (when I was hurt and disillusioned), the people who love us, the people who make us who we are, and the person who believes in what we're doing and why we're doing it and the person who says, "yeah, it's so scary to show up, it feels dangerous to be seen, it's terrifying, but it is not as scary, dangerous, or terrifying as getting to the end of our lives, and thinking what if I would have shown up, what if it had been different?"
































