## What makes an ugly guy become attractive?
[Reference](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/74utcy/what_makes_an_ugly_guy_become_attractive/)

- Passion for something in their life. A hobby, a job, anything really.
- This. So much this... My best friend is a lazy ass slob who is average looking and yet I get this close to grabbing his face and kissing his glaze off when he starts talking about dota with a crazy twinkle in his eye. I don't even pay attention, just get lost in his sea of words. My two friends hooked up after the guy spent an hour discussing rat dissection techniques. She later fessed up saying he had never looked hotter.
- I was getting deep and passionate about one this a while back, all spiritual and stuff. Totally lost my own train of thought and can't even remember what I said, but we kissed and been dating since. Pretty much she said she had no clue what I said, just that it was amazing how deep I got into it.
- When me and my girlfriend were just dating and going pretty slow, we had one night where we were talking about some stuff, and I was explaining some things about astronomy and some more "out there" theories on the universe. She wanted to know more and I got really excited while explaining it to her and the way she looked at me was so intense and it was really the turning point that advanced our relationship.
- Being in shape helps a lot, a sense of style, a nice personality, interesting hobbies.
- I don't think being in shape means being jacked, just look like you're healthy and take care of yourself. Style is pretty key, most men in an age group wear a very limited set of the same things, being a little different and showing some personality can go very far to making a man stand out. I would add having a good haircut makes a big difference, as well as well-maintained facial hair if you decide to go that route.
- I think for most people having a partner with a good personality means you are empathic, direct while being tactful, interesting to talk to, and are relatively free of neuroses and hang-ups from past bad experiences. Being interesting is very important, I think, the absolute key to being good socially, this is where having interesting hobbies comes in. It builds your self-esteem, which eventually comes out as confidence.
- I'd rather be with someone who is putting in the time and incredible effort it takes to challenge and manage their mental illnesses. It says a lot about their willpower and character to that effort in, even if some days are bad and you don't always win.
- I think the hardest part is that people either can't or won't see how much effort you're putting into this sort of thing. I tried so hard to "fix" myself in my last relationship and then to have my ex tell me that she didn't think I was trying at all, she might as well have slapped me across the face. I'm glad that you and your wife have each other, thanks for giving me a bit of hope.
- I went to a swing dancing club a few years back and this Hefty guy was dancing with all the prettiest girls. You want to know why? First of all, because the dude knew how to dance, but 2nd, he looked like he spent a little money on his clothes, haircut, and he smelled nice. He wasn't creepy and he actually looked like he could be a nice person to talk to.
- Start with 4 hours of exercise per week, whatever makes you happy. Cut down soda to one per week. Cut down on alcohol to less than 10 drinks per week, and then do things that excite you. Being passionate about something will help with having a personality.
- You might not be born with a perfect jawline or perfect eyes or a perfect nose but there are about a billion different things you can do to make yourself look decent. To be honest, I don’t blame girls who are “shallow” and pick guys by looks - guys who look unattractive are often too lazy to clean themselves up and have a shitty personality to match.
- The key to being interesting is being interested. People are interested in people who have a passion for something. You said you don't have any interesting hobbies, so it sounds like it's time to explore around a bit. Even if you don't get really into something, just talking about an idea for a project or a class you started taking is enough. Do you like programming? Drawing? (Every good artist was shit when they started). Ultimate frisbee? Historical documentaries? Collecting old knives? Hiking your local parks? Reading fiction? Welding? Wood shop? Making models of world war 2 planes? Maybe you will get super into fashion and make that your hobby.
- There are two components here -- being able to do impressive athletic stuff (e.g. sending hard climbing routes, gymnastics tricks, running triathlons, etc. these overlap with interesting hobbies), and having a relatively lean, muscular physique (in order to appear conventionally attractive -- sexual preference can vary pretty wildly between individuals). The former can be accomplished by trying out lots of things and seeing which ones appeal to you most (though you may need a modicum of fitness to start, so maybe stick with it if you don't like it initially until you attain basic competence?), and the latter is accomplished primarily by engaging in full-body progressive overload in a safe and consistent manner, while also adjusting caloric intake as you go to ensure you're in a surplus, deficit, or at maintenance for general recomp, depending on your goals.
- Also important: actually being able to flirt with people, i.e. slowly and carefully introducing "sexually charged" banter and adjusting your behavior depending on the response you receive. By "sexually charged" I don't mean anything explicit, just the occasionally light compliment on something like a person's shoes or hair, to start (whatever they seem to have put a lot of time in -- e.g. if a girl you're trying to flirt with has really intricately painted nails or woven braids or whatever, compliment that). If they respond positively (with body language and words), then try again with something slightly more forward in the future, or ask them out (if you're not already on a date -- if you are, escalate to holding their hand or something). If they respond negatively or neutrally, back off. "Sexually charged" is probably the wrong word to use for your initial flirtations, but it's where you might aim for eventually.
- I'd clarify that this means interesting to you and not, just, like, base-jumping and deep-sea treasure hunting and oil painting or whatever. I guess figure out where in hobbyspace you enjoy being most, and then explore in greater depth those areas that feature a decent proportion of available folks of your preferred demographic. At least insofar as you want to meet people through that hobby who are also interested in it, so that you can have a good conversation starter and then later pursue that hobby together. If you really like, IDK, golf and cigars or something (I know nothing about either) you might not find many singles-ready-to-mingle unless you're into old white dudes. Personally I like outdoorsy stuff and budget travel and have met no shortage of my type through either. Gives you lotsa great stories and conversation topics, too!
- Slight correction: care about what a small and exclusive number of people think about you. People you admire and look up to and know have looked out for your well being in the past.
- If your parents are wonderful you should care what they think. If some vapid friend of a friend criticises you inappropriately in public, gives zero fucks because that idiot doesn't matter.
- And that doesn't mean "dial your confidence up to 1000%". If a less than average looking guy acts like he's a 10/10, it makes me embarrassed for him at best and creeped out like he's trying to be a pick-up artist at worst. That being said, confidence, in appropriate amounts, is necessary; you don't want a guy that's just like "I'm so ugly, but hey, at least I can make you laugh!" because that's awkward too.
- My first thought when reading this question was "Step 1, stop thinking you're ugly". Self-image goes a long way in influencing your attractiveness. Being "ugly" and reeking of desperation/clinging to the first person who thinks you're not ugly is even less attractive.
- A fun personality. It's like seeing their face morph when you realize that they have a lot to offer personality wise.
- Beauty and good looks are different to every person. There have been men that I have been attracted to just based on looks but after getting to know them....they became ugly as hell because their personality was uglier than Shreks swamp ass. On the other side, my boyfriend wasn’t good looking to me when I first met him. But after getting to know him, conversations and being around him....he became one of the most handsome guys I know.
- The best wingmen are women. Preselection is a very real thing with women.
- No fucking kidding man. You could be walking around with a girl, doesn't even have to be your girl. All the girls be trying to catch your eye contact. The minute you're walking by yourself though, good luck finding the same energy.
- When he's actually a nice person for the sake of it, cares about you as a valued friend first and foremost, and has a passionate hobby that doesn't force him into basement dweller status.
- Yep. Throughout the years i have gotten attracted to homely looking guys (not ugly but just plain and not what you would consider "handsome") because of their alpha personalities. They would take charge, say smart things, knew where they were at in life and what they wanted and didn't look like they gave shit what anyone though of them. It would make me drawn to them.
- This "ugly guy" you're on about is probably not that bad. Everyone finds someone attractive. But if you don't believe that making people laugh and being nice helps.
- If Casey Neistat can be considered attractive, anyone can be. Even if you look like you dropped your face down the garbage disposal, personality, hobbies, and good fashion (and like soooo much money) can make anyone attractive.
- Learn how to handle rejection, it happens to everyone. If you get turned down you need to remember there are plenty of reasons that this has happened - they like someone else, they are having a bad day, you just aren't their type etc.
- Confidence is the number one answer. Not the arrogant insecure kind like being overly aggressive or putting others down to look better. But a quiet, humble confidence that doesn't need the approval of people to thrive. In short, be your own person. Do things you enjoy, wear the clothing you enjoy, hang out with people who don't suck. Treat women with respect, as equals. Don't have an ego derived agenda. Accept everyone on their own terms. Don't be desperate for attention from them. Take care of yourself body, mind and spirit. Don't subscribe to the culturally acceptable definition of masculinity. Embrace truth as it makes itself known to you and learn from your mistakes . Treat others kindly and love everyone without reservation or asking for anything in return. Do all those things and you'll be the best lookin' dude in any room.
- So many guys who've realized they're not above average looking throw in the towel and develop a terrible and often mean spirited victim mentality. They decide all of their problems with dating are everyone else's fault instead of being proactive and dealing with how society's standards make them feel.
- Oddly enough, some of the kindest people I've met in my entire life have been not just attractive but abnormally so. I met a professional model who travels the world in college who immediately invited me to a party and was just over-the-top friendly. I usually don't get invited off the bat to things because I'm kinda quiet. One of my coworkers at a preschool I used to work at was crazy beautiful and she treated me with way more respect than some of the other women there. I often felt like some of my coworkers there treated me like an alien or just generally had snarky things to say to me and she always stood up for me in those situations.
- I do think that being attractive gives people a massive edge in life. There is no denying that. I don't like to assume, though, that they are impervious to bitterness anymore. I've seen some of the shit some of my more attractive friends have to deal with with my own eyes, often because of their looks, and some of it isn't pretty. For one thing, I notice that there is a very real tendency for them to get used and abused and thrown away like objects. Sometimes people automatically treat them like shit or think they're dumb because of their own bias or issues. There are also people who idolize them and then get mad when they don't reach their lofty expectations.
- Real world encounters are a more even playing field for average joes because personality, affect, and interests are more easy to see. The problem is they're harder to set up and involve more initial effort.
- Start working out. Your body image and mental image will change as your body changes. You will also start to feel healthier and more lively. These little rifts in confidence will also start to lead you away from the “I’m ugly” mentality. Dress like you have somewhere to go, even if it’s just to go grocery shopping. Take a moment out of the day to pamper yourself (getting dressed and doing your hair). Make sure the clothing is fitted to your particular body. A nice fitted pair of pants do wonders! Tell yourself every morning,”you look good today” smile, and let go of negativity (well as much as you can).
- So, while it's true that conventionally physically attractive people tend to have more initial access to relationships, it's also fair to say that people who are good at relationships can in a sense become more physically attractive because of it.
- Physical traits are not what makes me find a dude sexy. It's ALWAYS a combination of: being nice and attentive to people they are talking to, good hygiene (no bad breath), good sense of humour and ability to joke around, knows some stuff and is generally intelligent.
- I'm talking about a dude who is willing to listen to you, help you out any way he can, and try to make your day to day life just a little bit brighter. Someone who remembers your favorite things after the first time you tell him. Does he have to be hot just to have a heart? No. I'm talking about someone who has empathy, who feels sad for others going through bad shit. Someone who will give you a hug when you're sad, but won't make you feel guilty if you don't want a hug. Someone who views others as equals, until proven otherwise. Someone who is honest, but not to the point of being rude; he would always try to put his words kindly.
- Dorky friend gives the best compliments and makes everyone feel like a genius or supermodel. His compliments are nonchalant and genuine.
