## How Successful People Make The Most Of Their Weekends
[link](http://www.businessinsider.com/how-successful-people-spend-weekends-2014-11#the-first-step-to-controlling-your-weekends-is-making-conscious-choices-1)

- *Make conscious choices.* Instead of doing something by default, choose to decide how your time is spent. In a world of constant connectivity, even loafing time must be consciously chosen, because time will be filled with something whether it's consciously chosen or not, and not choosing means that the something that fills our hours will be less fulfilling than the something our remembering selves will likely wish we'd elected to do.
- *Make appointments for yourself, even if it's only to read a book.* If you know you want to read a book, then get the book out and have it set aside and make plans to read it.
- *Planning actually makes weekends happier, and unlocks a key mechanism of joy.* Anticipation accounts for a huge chunk of happiness, which comes from thinking about the events we plan. As you look forward to something good that is about to happen, you experience some of the sam joy you would in the moment.
- *Plan three to five anchor events each weekend, but don't plan out every hour.* Three things taking three hours apiece is nine hours of your 36 waking ones.
- *Make a list of the things you dream about doing, and you'll find the ones you can do every day.* "A List of 100 Dreams" can prompt you to brainstorm anything you might want to do in life.
- *As you make your plans, don't discount something you haven't done in years.* Even if there are activities that you haven't done since childhood, you can still make them part of your regular weekends.
- *Weekend morning can be the best time to do things for yourself.* "If you're training for a marathon, it's less disruptive for your family if you get up early to do your four-hour run than if you try to do it in the middle of the day. To get up early, you'll probably have to avoid staying up late the night before, but this is a good idea in general."
- *Establish small habits to create new traditions for your family.* Happy families often have some special weekend activity that everyone loves but no one has to plan each time. Traditions become comforting memories, which are proven to boost happiness.
- *Set aside specific hours for down time, and turn off your phone.*
- *Be sure to make plans for Sunday night so you don't sit around stressing about your job.* Planning something for Sunday nights is an easy way to avoid stressing about work in anticipation of Monday. That can happen even when you like your job, but for people who don't like their jobs, Sunday night stress can be draining and sad.
- *Keep chores, errands, and busy work to a minimum on your days off.* Finishing chores shouldn't be central to your weekend because they often expand to fill available time. Instead, try to do a chore each day during the week. If that's not possible then set aside small windows of time during the weekend. For example, set a half an hour on a Friday night between dinner and when you watch a movie to put away the laundry, or 20 minutes between your piano lesson and bike ride on Saturday morning to empty the garbage.
- *Make sure to unplug completely for at least a few hours.*
- *If you live to be 80, you'll have 4,160 weekends in total, so don't let any go to waste.* "What the most successful people know about weekends is that life cannot happen only in the future. It cannot wait for some day when we are less tired or less busy." So start with this weekend and do something.
