programming/ruby/design/dry-rb-articles.md, before:

# Dry-Validation as a schema validation layer for Ruby on Rails API
[Reference](https://mensfeld.pl/2017/03/dry-validation-as-a-schema-validation-layer-for-ruby-on-rails-api/)

- ActiveRecord::Validations? They work, but they aren't designed as a protection layer for ensuring incoming data schema consistency. The external world and its data won't always resemble your internal application structure.
- Integrating with Rails:
  - No more strong parameters.
  - Schema testing in isolation, not in the controller request!
  - Model validations that focus only on the core details.
  - Less coupling in your business logic.
  - Safer extending and replacing of endpoints.
  - More DRY.
  - Nested structures validation.
- Non-obstructing data schema, you can do a `before_action`. Lol.

## Comments

- AR::V is used for validating DB records, the input your app receives often doesn't match what you store in the database. That's the fundamental problem with AR::Validations.
- The problem with self-validating objects is that it mixes "data" with the object's state.
- Self-validating objects means that it's allowed for a domain object to be an invalid state. (So you need to check that too?)

Commit message:

Ruby: On introducing dry-validation.

programming/ruby/design/dry-rb-articles.md, after:

# Introducing dry-validation
[Reference](http://solnic.eu/2015/12/07/introducing-dry-validation.html)

- Problem with AM::V:
  - Validation logic lives in two layers, controller and persistence.
  - "Strong parameters" is a poor API. It just checks if keys in parameters are not missing and sanitizing the parameters by rejecting unexpected keys.
  - Validation in AR/AM: lack of type safety. Weird explicit handling of blank values.
  - Weird DSL with `if` and `unless`.
  - Not good for nested data structures.
  - Weird that an object is validating its own internal state.
- On strong parameters: Weird error messages. You can be 100% precise about your expectations.

# Dry-Validation as a schema validation layer for Ruby on Rails API
[Reference](https://mensfeld.pl/2017/03/dry-validation-as-a-schema-validation-layer-for-ruby-on-rails-api/)

- ActiveRecord::Validations? They work, but they aren't designed as a protection layer for ensuring incoming data schema consistency. The external world and its data won't always resemble your internal application structure.
- Integrating with Rails:
  - No more strong parameters.
  - Schema testing in isolation, not in the controller request!
  - Model validations that focus only on the core details.
  - Less coupling in your business logic.
  - Safer extending and replacing of endpoints.
  - More DRY.
  - Nested structures validation.
- Non-obstructing data schema, you can do a `before_action`. Lol.

## Comments

- AR::V is used for validating DB records, the input your app receives often doesn't match what you store in the database. That's the fundamental problem with AR::Validations.
- The problem with self-validating objects is that it mixes "data" with the object's state.
- Self-validating objects means that it's allowed for a domain object to be an invalid state. (So you need to check that too?)
