Of the innumerable dishes that humans have eaten throughout history, we know of only a fraction, and it's because somebody took the time to record the recipe. And recipes, like descriptions of past events, run the gamut from a comprehensive list of ingredients, precise measurements, and well-written cooking processes to a vague description of a dish mentioning only a couple of the ingredients. Spoiler: most recipes before 1850 find themselves on the latter end of that spectrum, but that's where this book comes in.

But after the aiklon came the epaikla, a sort of potluck where they brought food made at home. They ate kammata, which were cakes made with barley meal soaked in olive oil and wrapped in laurel leaves. They also ate fresh greens, wheat bread, beans, sausage, and little round honey cakes called physikillos. But it was the Melas Zomos that non-Spartan Greeks made infamous in their writings. In the Deipnosophistae, Athenaeus tells of a man from Sybaris who dined in Sparta and subsequently proclaimed: It is no wonder that Spartans are the bravest men in the world; for anyone in his right mind would prefer to die ten thousand times rather than [live as miserably as this.]

In De agri cultura he tells the reader not only how to farm but also how to do so profitably. Sometimes this included best practices of how to grow crops and which crops made the most money or which blessings to perform to ensure that the gods allowed your farm to keep running. Though sometimes the advice was far less charming, like how to reduce rations for slaves if they weren't working hard enough and advice on selling those slaves if they got sick or too old to work. But regardless of our modern feelings on Cato's business practices, we can thank his writings for giving us not only this recipe but also a glimpse into the values of the average Roman citizen at the time. "When they would praise a worthy man, their praise took this form: 'Good husbandman, good farmer';… it is from the farming class that the bravest men and the sturdiest soldiers come."

Garum is fermented fish sauce and was a beloved ingredient in Ancient Rome, often being a substitute for salt, just as it is today in many East Asian cuisines. Made from fish, usually tuna or mackerel, salt, and herbs, garum was big business all across the Mediterranean. Pliny the Elder called it "choice liquor" and preferred a type from southern Spain called garum sociorum, or "garum of comrades," and claimed that no liquid but perfume was more highly valued. Garum was prized both as an ingredient and as a medicine. Pliny claimed it could treat dog bites and earaches.

The problem with garum is in its production. Huge vats of fermenting fish sitting out in the hot Mediterranean sun created a stench that seemed to wreak havoc on real estate values. In some places, it was so bad that laws, like those in the Byzantine Hexabiblos, stated that any new garum factories had to be built far from any city or town. Another issue with garum seemed to be its aftereffects. Multiple writers tell about the putrid belching of those who enjoyed too much garum and the poet Martial once praised a young man for being able to continue his romantic advances on a woman after she'd had six helpings of garum. With that in mind, we'll go light on the garum in this recipe and I think you'll find that there is no fishy flavor, but simply a savory umami, a flavor that is hard to put into words but is intrinsic to Roman cuisine. Just to be safe, you may want to wait a few hours before kissing anyone.

And that is when King Louis, who I assume had been asking the coachman, "Are we there yet?" ever since leaving Paris, began to feel peckish for a bit of Brie cheese and a glass of Burgundy. They stopped at an inn to indulge. Different versions of the story abound, but they all agree that, at some point, the royal couple had indeed been recognized (perhaps because Louis's face was on the coins everyone was using) and had been pursued. This last pit stop was what allowed the revolutionaries to catch up to the royal entourage and, in the midst of their wine and Brie, they were all taken into custody and returned to Paris, where, after a couple years in captivity, Louis was marched up to Madame Guillotine. His last request? A final taste of Brie de Meaux.

Via a series of opulent dinners, Talleyrand won over the leaders of Europe, and as the conference drew to a close he played his ace. In a display of gastronomic diplomacy, Talleyrand held a contest to determine the greatest cheese of Europe. Lord Castlereagh nominated English Stilton, Baron de Falck espoused Dutch Limburger, the Swiss had Gruyère, and Italy, Stracchino. Fifty-two cheeses in all were brought forth to the contest, the last being Talleyrand's own: a wheel of Brie de Meaux. And it was that Brie that helped France retain some of its pride as, via a vote by the other nations, it was crowned "Le Roi des Fromages." No longer just the Cheese of Kings, but the King of Cheese!

The first recipes for spiced wine in Europe come from the Ancient Roman cookbook by Apicius De re coquinaria and the practice of spiking wine with spice was one of the few things to survive the fall of Rome. Throughout Spain a drink called piment is found in the recipe collections of the Early Middle Ages, and in the 1180s Chrétien de Troyes wrote an Arthurian legend where Sir Perceval ends each meal with a cup of the piment before continuing his search for the Holy Grail. Soon the term "piment" was replaced by "hippocras" or "ypocras," derived from the manicum hippocraticum, or Hippocratic Sleeve, through which the spices are strained.

Hippocras was thought to help indigestion after large meals and, more important, could balance the humors. The theory of the four humors guided medicine for centuries and the medieval mind was obsessed with keeping their blood, yellow bile, black bile, and phlegm in balance. Food was the preferred method of doing this, as daily bloodlettings can get tedious.

Saint Benedict prescribed: "Above all things… over-indulgence must be avoided and a monk must never be overtaken by indigestion" (St. Benedict's Rule for Monasteries). But many a monk, living on the wealth of the monasteries, enjoyed a more gluttonous lifestyle. It was written of the twelfth-century Abbot Samson of Bury St. Edmunds: "Sweet milk, honey, and such like similar sweet things, he ate with greater appetite than other food" (The Chronicle of Jocelin of Brakelond).

Cook's Note: The word "currant" comes from the Ancient Greek city of Corinth. But they were not currants, the soft berries that grow on bushes, but dried grapes. Raisins of Corinth (often called Zante currants today) were the original currants, though other dried currants, including those from the bushes, have been used in baking for centuries.

Pancakes come in all shapes and sizes and are made with all sorts of ingredients. From the einkorn pancake that Ötzi the Iceman made fifty-three hundred years ago before he was frozen for posterity, to the savory okonomiyaki of Japan, which might include octopus or cabbage. But these seventeenth-century English pancakes are closer to what one might find at IHOP, albeit with more nutmeg. These are the pancakes of Shrove Tuesday. Shrove Tuesday is the day before Ash Wednesday, which ushers in the forty-day fast of Lent. While many people who observe Lent today give up chocolate or alcohol, the population of medieval and Renaissance England gave up much more, making Shrove Tuesday their last chance to gorge themselves into a pancake stupor.

Iced desserts date back thousands of years. The Greeks and Romans sweetened mountain snow with honey and wine, and during the Tang Dynasty (AD 618 to 906) in China, fermented milk heated with camphor was cooled and poured over ice. By the eleventh century, the Persians were making sharbat, later called sherbet by Sir Thomas Herbert following his travels in the 1620s: Their liquor is sometimes fair water, sugar, rose-water, and juice of lemons mixed, and sugar confected with citrons, violets or other sweet flowers; and for the more delicacy, sometimes a mixture of amber; this we call sherbet.

Sweet, fruit-filled boiled puddings have been a staple of the English holiday season for centuries. They became particularly popular when the English left their island to settle in places around the globe, because a boiled pudding makes a perfect long-distance gift. You can make it in June, then ship it to Canada, India, or Australia, because a journey of six months is but a blink in the life of a well-boiled pudding. An 1887 article in Good Housekeeping talks of a man named Colonel Hazard who received a pudding while he was gone on holiday and it sat for two years before he returned to eat it, after which he mused "that a good plum pudding, like the wheat found in the old Egyptian mummy cases, would keep all right for a thousand years."

The reason hardtack was a perfect military food was that, with its low to nonexistent water content, it was the only way to keep bread from getting moldy and could sit in a barrel for months or even years and still be good enough to eat. That's if bugs didn't get to it first. Biscuits were definitely less attractive to bugs than fresh bread or uncooked flour, but on a ship a worm would take what it could get. In The Adventures of Roderick Random by Tobias Smollett in 1748, in describing the rations aboard a ship, it says "every biscuit whereof, like a piece of clockwork, moved by its own internal impulse, occasioned by the myriads of insects that dwelt within it…" This is, no doubt, where the term "worm castles" came from.

The judgment of God sent the calamity to teach the Irish a lesson, that calamity must not be too much mitigated.… The real evil with which we have to contend is not the physical evil of the Famine, but the moral evil of the selfish, perverse, and turbulent character of the people. With little help from their government, the Irish people depended on the charity of other nations and private citizens. Donations came in from the tsar of Russia, the sultan of the Ottoman Empire, the pope, the city of Calcutta, Queen Victoria, the United States, and a young congressman named Abraham Lincoln. One of the most famous donations, a gift of $170, came in 1847 from the Choctaw Nation, who only sixteen years before had experienced starvation themselves on the infamous Trail of Tears. The Society of Friends, also known as the Quakers, sent tons of food from the United States and founded soup kitchens throughout Ireland, though their ability to help was dwarfed by the enormity of the situation. Sadly, for many, the choice was starvation or emigration. Between 1845 and 1851, over a million people perished and an estimated half million fled the country, mostly settling in Canada and the United States.

Simnel cake is a traditional English treat served on Mothering Sunday, which originally had nothing to do with mothers. It was the day set aside each spring to visit your mother church, or where you were baptized. At a time when people tended to live in their hometowns all their lives, this often meant going to the same church you always went to, not too exciting. But in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, as people flocked from rural villages to industrial jobs in the cities, the yearly pilgrimage home made a good excuse to visit your actual mother as well. And when you visit Mom, you should bring a simnel cake.

By the medieval era, when our recipe was written, the lasagne had become something closer to what we would recognize today, though still unbaked and with no sauce of any kind, let alone tomato sauce, which wouldn't come to Italian food until the 1500s. But even in its early form, the dish had become a staple of Italian cuisine and is written of often even outside of cookbooks. The thirteenth-century Franciscan friar Jacopone da Todi wrote: "Those who count only size are often deceived. The strength of a grain of pepper will conquer lasagne." Something to keep in mind when we pepper our lasagne.

Le Ménagier de Paris was written around 1393 and is written in the fictional voice of an elderly husband instructing his new wife, a girl of fifteen, on how to manage the household. This includes, among other things, gardening tips, instructions for when she visits the market, advice on how to keep her husband satisfied in the bedroom, and of course recipes, including three for porée. Porée is a simple dish of cooked greens, and the book includes recipes for white porée made with leeks, green porée made with cheese or butter, and black porée made with bacon fat.

In America's first cookbook, from 1796, American Cookery, Ms. Simmons offers two recipes for apple pie with rosewater, a popular ingredient in much baking of the period. But even with these spruced-up recipes, apple pie's association with Americanness had another 150 years to wait. Not until the GIs of WW II headed across the Atlantic to fight in Germany did "mom and apple pie" become something to fight for. In light of that, I suppose it's somewhat ironic that this apple pie recipe is German, but I assure you, it's no less delicious.

This recipe for a pumpkin tourte is one of the first recipes for pumpkin anything in Europe. The gourd had only arrived from the New World a few decades earlier and Bartolomeo Scappi was one of the first chefs to put it to work. The pumpkin he would have used is unknown and was likely several different varieties, none of which we have today, but a sugar pumpkin or butternut squash gives the best flavor here.

As far back as 2000 BC, the inhabitants of the isle of Samos were dining on a savory cheesecake that they used for weddings and religious festivals. By 776 BC, those cheesecakes were eaten by Greek athletes preparing for the first Olympic games, which makes me wonder why there isn't a Cheesecake Factory in the Olympic Village. By the Romans' Republic, the cheesecake had become sweetened with honey, like in the recipe for placenta by Cato the Elder. He also has recipes for cheesecakes called Libum and Savillum, the latter of which begins to resemble the cheesecakes of later millennia, and perhaps it was one of those that some Roman settler brought to Britannia, for cheesecake has been a staple there for centuries.

As far back as Ancient Egypt, the Ebers Papyrus claimed that garlic could be used to ward off snakes, scorpions, and wasps as well as mosquitos and other bloodsucking bugs, and in Ancient Greece and Rome garlic was used to treat all manner of blood diseases. Later, in the medieval era, several diseases were associated with an aversion to garlic and those diseases may have formed the basis for the belief in vampires themselves. Diseases like porphyria. Along with a revulsion to sulfuric foods such as garlic, sufferers of porphyria can have pale skin and form an extreme sensitivity to sunlight. They also exhibit a receding of the lips and gums, giving their teeth a more fang-like appearance.

Even more vampiric is rabies. Also a possible origin for the belief in werewolves, this disease was often spread via the bite of a dog or a bat. Over the next few days, the victim would completely change in demeanor and appearance, becoming more aggressive and violent, culminating in a froth of bloody foam dripping from their mouth. The sufferer's sense of smell would become heightened, making things like certain herbs and garlic repugnant to them. The causes of these diseases being unknown at the time, many attributed the change to demonic possession; thus a bit of garlic could be just the thing you need to save you from harm.

The first origin story of pretzels dates to AD 610, with an Italian monk instructing his pupils in their lenten prayers. In an effort to reward them for a job well done, he gave them a treat: a bit of bread twisted into the shape of a child's arms folded in prayer, and he dubbed them pretiola, or "little rewards." A wonderful origin story with almost no truth to it. Unfortunately, nobody really knows where pretzels got their start or their name. The Germans claim that they first twisted bread into knots and called them bracellus after the Latin word for "bracelet." Whoever invented them, it is undoubtedly the Germans who made them famous. Their popularity there was such that in 1111 they began to appear on the emblems of bakers' guilds, and in the tenth century they're seen in depictions of the Last Supper in Bavarian churches (e.g., The Last Supper, from Bavaria, J. Paul Getty Museum MS Ludwig VII 1, fol. 38).

Lemonade, as we know it today, is a French invention from around the time of this recipe from Le cuisinier françois, one of France's most influential cookbooks of the seventeenth century. Lemonade quickly took off to become a favorite drink of Paris, where it was sold on the streets by the Compagnie de Limonadiers, a lemonade company that formed in 1676. While these roving lemonade merchants provided the citizens of Paris with refreshment, there is also a theory that they spared the city from an outbreak of plague in the late seventeenth century. The disease ravaged much of France at the time, but Paris remained little affected, and it's possible this was due in part to the heaps of lemon peels on the streets left behind by the Compagnie de Limonadiers. The peels contain limonene and linalool, both of which kill the larvae of fleas and are still used in many pet shampoos today, so while this is just a theory, it has some scientific merit to back it up.

Tomatoes are a New World food, a favorite of the civilizations of Mesoamerica since at least AD 700. The Aztecs called them tomatl, and when the Spanish arrived in the 1500s they took the fruit and the name, as best they could pronounce it, back to Europe with them. But tomatoes got a mixed reception. Some dubbed it the apple of gold or pom d'or, from which the Italians got pomodoro, and believed it to be an aphrodisiac. But others equated tomatoes with their cousin belladonna or deadly nightshade, a favorite poison of sixteenth-century Italy, and the fear seemed to be borne out when tomatoes began poisoning people. Or at least people thought they were. More likely, it was the acidic tomato leaching lead out of the pewter plates that the wealthy of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries used. But the poor, who couldn't afford pewter, seemed unaffected and tomatoes began to find their way into the everyday cuisine of the Mediterranean.

Eventually, the French influence on southern cuisine spread the use of the tomato throughout the United States, and at the end of the nineteenth century an influx of immigrants from Italy made the fruit essential to any diet. But is the tomato a fruit? Any good botanist would say yes, but the United States Supreme Court would beg to differ, though perhaps not for the reason you might think. The Tariff of 1883 required a tax to be paid on any imported vegetables, but fruit was exempt, so when a tariff was imposed on a shipment of Caribbean tomatoes destined for John Nix & Co. of New York, Mr. Nix filed a lawsuit, since tomatoes were a fruit. The case made its way to the Supreme Court, and in 1893, in the case of Nix v. Hedden, Justice Horace wrote an opinion stating: "Botanically speaking, tomatoes are the fruit of a vine, just as are cucumbers, squashes, beans, and peas. But in the common language of the people, whether sellers or consumers of provisions, all these are vegetables."

Likely made somewhere in Central Asia, the original samosa was a way to preserve meat for long journeys. As Muslim traders traveled across Asia and Africa and into Spain, they brought the samosa with them, and while each culture who adopted the dish made it their own, different shapes, fillings, doughs, and cooking methods, their names are all related. But as diverse as they are, when I hear "samosa" I think India, and that's where the recipe here comes from.

The city was under siege, and in no time the people were starving. When they dug at the base of the walls, they found that many of the foundational bricks were not bricks at all but blocks of glutinous rice cakes—Niangao. Today Niangao is most associated with the Chinese New Year and is made as a round cake, but this recipe, from AD 544, calls for the cake to be formed into the same brick shape that Wu Zixu made his wall from a millennium earlier.

As far back as 1270, descriptions of somen noodles liken them to ropes of wheat and call for them to be stretched to lengths of twenty feet or longer, then hung on rods to dry. In the form of comedic storytelling Rakugo, there are stories of people draping the long noodles over their ears and neck or hanging them from upstairs windows and running downstairs to eat them from the bottom up, though this seems like a choking hazard and I would not recommend it.

This simple but delicious recipe for fried pork comes from one of Korea's oldest cookbooks, Eumsikdimibang (음식디미방). It's also one of Asia's first cookbooks written by a woman, Jang Gye-hyang.

Makshufa is a sweet nut-filled candy from medieval Baghdad, and just like any candy, the most important ingredient is sugar. As early as 8000 BCE sugarcane was eaten on the island of New Guinea, and it slowly spread through the islands of Indonesia before arriving in India, where it was called sarkara. It became part of the ancient system of medicine Ayurveda.

Though if you're not supposed to drink water, then what do you drink? Fuqqa. The book contains over a dozen recipes for the foamy beer known as fuqqa, a popular alcoholic beverage in medieval Egypt. These could be flavored with, among other things, mint, pomegranate, pepper, or cardamom, though he warns that, delicious as these beers are, they are likely to cause headaches and flatulence. One thing that will stand out to any modern reader of the Kanz al-fawa'id is the number of recipes that are accompanied by a warning of impending flatulence. Even the plain cold water doesn't escape without the caveat. So of course, it's no shock that I must offer the same word of caution with this hummus recipe, as the author singles out chickpeas as a particular culprit, but I assure you, it's worth it.

Tamales were a staple of the diet of many Mesoamerican cultures and are depicted as far back as the first century in Mayan murals, but this first written description of water tamales, by the Spanish Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahagún, sounds horribly bland. No salt, no chili, and not nixtamalized (a process discussed later in the recipe for Quesadillas Cernidas).

The Aztecs loved their xocolatl. The Spanish friar Bernardino de Sahagún gives us this general idea of how they made their famous chocolate drink and says it was often flavored with flowers, honey, achiote, chile peppers, vanilla, allspice, and other ingredients you'd likely not find in hot chocolate today. But to the Aztecs, cacao beans were so much more than just the base for a delicious drink. They were a precious commodity that, at times, acted as currency. In 1545, a market in Mexico City sold a turkey for one hundred cacao beans, a rabbit for thirty, a chicken egg for two, and one cacao bean could buy you a single tamale.

And while the cheese was introduced to Mexican cuisine by the Spanish, the corn, or maize, has been a staple of the Mesoamerican diet since time immemorial. According to the Mayan creation myth described in the Popul Vuh, maize was there at the very beginning when the gods used it to literally make humans. But the Aztecs were not so fortunate and had to rely on the feathered serpent god, Quetzalcoatl, to get it for them.

My favorite liquor, a spirit flavored with juniper berry, began life in the Netherlands under the name genever (also spelled jenever or genièvre). At the end of the seventeenth century, the Netherlands made two key imports to England: Willem van Oranje and genever, both of which received a name change. Willem became William III of England and genever was shortened to "gin." As the new king enjoyed the drink, thought to be medicinal, gin gained in popularity over the more common ales drunk by the common man and the brandy that suffered from its association with France.

The word "pecan" comes, via the French, from the Algonquin word Paccan, which referred to any nut that required a stone to crack. We can be glad that this is the name that stuck rather than what Spanish settlers dubbed them, nuez de la arruga, which translates to "wrinkle nut." I don't imagine many families would welcome a wrinkle nut pie at their Thanksgiving table. For most of their history pecans grew wild, the first orchard not being planted until 1772 on Long Island, New York. It was around the time that the nut was becoming quite popular with America's founding fathers. Thomas Jefferson, who often called them Illinois nuts in his writings, gave a bag to George Washington, who had them planted at Mount Vernon, and the general was said to have always had his pockets filled with the nuts and was constantly eating them throughout the Revolution.
