## A Runner's Guide to Base Building
[link](http://www.active.com/running/Articles/A-Runner-s-Guide-to-Base-Building.htm?)

Elite athletes succeed in winning races and breaking world records using cyclic training.

3 core phases--base building, peak, recovery. *Base building means starting from a lower base of infrequent mileage and progressing to more frequent runs including two to three shorter runs and one long run per week. Base building for the newbie is defined by building regularity in training at consistent, easy-to-moderate effort levels, while high intensity, speed work is left to future training cycles when experience and mileage are well established.* In one sense, the first training session for a newbie is an extended version of the base building cycle from which they will progress to run another event and try to improve their performance. *Mileage should increase by no more than 10 percent each week and intensity should be kept at an easy to moderate level.*

Another important ingredient for newbie base building is cross-training as it serves as active rest for the running muscles. *By alternating running days with cross-training days, the newbie body can train at a higher overall frequency without the high risk of injury from running on back-to-back days.* Cycling, swimming, and classes at the gym are a few favorite cross-training activities for runners and should be done at an easy effort level if your primary goal is a running event. Total body strength training twice per week can also contribute to the success of your running by building strong muscles, tendons and joints.

As you progress, include short and long easy runs, hills runs, and short interval speed workouts. *The speed workout in the initial stages of base building can force on short, very hard intensity intervals of 30-75 seconds with longer active recoveries jogging easy for three to four minutes.* From there it flows into longer three to five minute intervals at around 5K pace. As you progress closer to the race, training becomes more specific to the demands and effort levels on race day. By the time you're into the peak phase, the long run mileage continues to progress while the speed effort level more closely simulates that of race pace or slightly faster for longer intervals.
