biking/til-biking.md, before:

## Shotgun (April 16, 2016)
- 11-28 also sucks for climbing, you get exhausted easily. Apparently this is already a "climb-safe" gearing, so you still have to improve your legs, suffering potential, and weight.
- Practice out of the saddle at threshold for long climbs.
- Caliper brakes--need to keep it locked always, you nearly died.
- Practice descending turning to the right.
- Practice mounting the bike with the left pedal as the first stroke.
- Always always have a multitool.

## Las Pinas-La Mesa (April 2, 2016)
- The 11-32 is a hassle because it promotes no-downshifting behavior.
- Practice climbing with ass form since you are doing it asymmetrically.
- Very cheap to buy water at refilling stations.
- Commonwealth is not as scary as you think it is.

## Bike to UP (March 2, 2016)
- Warm up first before going all out, or stretch before, as you will get muscle pain
- 22-23kph is doable

## Centurion Challenge (February 27, 2016)
- Improving on climbing and descending :D
- House to Inang Valings/Antipolo Hospital (no traffic, relaxed pace) 1 hour 13 minutes
- Never ever ever forget your pump
- Really learn how to change a flat
- Going to Jariels climbs: To Inang Valings, to Palo Alto/radar, to Sierra Madre, 3 more Cat 3/4 climbs
- Jariels to Valing climbs: 4 including the fucking Radar climb in reverse
- Need better nutrition and saddle to deal with saddle sores
- New pedal is awesome
- Climbing training and core pa more, hard to maintain climbing position with a weak core
- Practice tempo of climbs
- Need Gatorade constantly. Electrolytes got depleted at some point
- Fitbars suck, Nutribars still rock
- Strategize for Audax how the hell you are going to deal with the Sampaloc climb

## Bike to Antipolo before work (February 25, 2016)
- Too high cadence on a granny gear will result in you getting gassed

## Bike to Sierra Madre (February 21, 2016)
- 80 psi tire pressure is too high, bottle dropped 10 times
- Descending, put your leg out on the direction you are curving to
- Sierra Madre Hotel categorized climbs: To Valings, to Palo Alto, to the radar, to the Sierra Madre Hotel
-

## Bike to Antipolo before work
- Shades are very easy to lose, don't hook them in your shirt collar

## Angeles Solo (February 14, 2016)
- Nutribars are good to eat when in transit, cut them up
- Buff is sometimes not needed over your neck it is too hot
- Don't leave your water bottle at random locations it might fall into the water lilies

## Bike to Agoo (January 23-24, 2016)

- 1st day, 180km (Fairview-Rosales) is doable if not that many stops since after Angeles its generally flats
- 2nd day, IT WAS SO HOT, get things wet and try not to stop in the middle of an urbanized area like Urdaneta
- Highest elevation change is from Pangasinan-La Union (Sison-Rosario), need an FD there
- Bike jersey is awesome get another one ASAP
- Need a better seat post to avoid chafing
- Need a rack bag because the backpack doesn't fit exactly on the rack
- Investigate why FD is so hard to shift
- Really watch out the road since you got semplang in Agoo part
- Get new cords for charging the phones, yours sucks
- Have to know how to eat while riding
- Don't forget protein drink after the ride
- Unused things: Compression shirt, buff, malong. Nice to have: Bike jersey for second day.
- Bike bottle holder GONE
- Possible eye protection that isn't sunglasses

## First Ride to Angeles (Sept 6 2015)

- Heat stroke is a bitch!
- You need more exercise and practice in biking/weaving through traffic.
- In general, jeepneys have weird habits (random swerving/stopping) so adjust accordingly.
- The rear derailleur is the most important and most vulnerable part of the bike.
- When putting the bike in bus, cover the RD with your helmet.
- Even without a full fold, you can put your bike at the back of your car.
- You need disciplined shifting. Ideally, you should have the same cadence the entirety of your ride.
- Figure out a way to insulate your water from the heat. Possibly put ice in there so it lasts longer.
- No need to carry a rain jacket. If it rains, then you get wet.
- Apply petroleum jelly liberally to your butt, it will get sore at some point.
- Try to hydrate before you even get on the bike.
- You need to acclimatize yourself when it comes to riding in the heat. If you aren't used to those temperatures, it will affect you and make it harder than for someone who is used to it.
- Replaced rear brake pads: 30 for the 2 pads (generic), 20 for the labor

## Random

- Put things you hold on your left hand
- Tune up @Iron Bike costs 100

## First Ride to UP/Office

- Kalayaan from Cubao is a long-ass uphill
- Prepare for hills by downshifting prematurely
- Increase height of seat (you should be able to stand over your bike just barely)
- Hard to breathe with a mask
- Camelbak Eddy is too big for the Topeak
- Don't wear boots if raining, wear slippers. :)

## House-Ortigas-White Plains-House

- Need to learn how to use a bike pump
- Now it makes sense why people have GPS on when you get lost
- Temple Drive is uphill
- EDSA bike lane is nice and there is nothing to fear but just bring a mouth mask for the pollution
- Don't use bikes if wheels are flat since the spokes can go
- Nearest bike shop is Glorious in Anonas
- Schwalbe Marathon tires to replace my tires
- The Anemos front fork folder jams
- It's really hard to bike up when you have a full backpack
- Always bring food, you were forced to do a Kowloon stop

Commit message:

Add TIL on San Fernando/Tagaytay

biking/til-biking.md, after:

## San Fernando again (May 7, 2016)

- So many flats.
- Do not leave people behind in a group ride, be patient and ride.
- 23-24kph over flats is doable/chill pace, 27 is pushing it.
- Not really enjoying North trips because of the dust/heat factor.

## Tagaytay

- The heat when going back to Manila is sweltering.

## Shotgun (April 16, 2016)
- 11-28 also sucks for climbing, you get exhausted easily. Apparently this is already a "climb-safe" gearing, so you still have to improve your legs, suffering potential, and weight.
- Practice out of the saddle at threshold for long climbs.
- Caliper brakes--need to keep it locked always, you nearly died.
- Practice descending turning to the right.
- Practice mounting the bike with the left pedal as the first stroke.
- Always always have a multitool.

## Las Pinas-La Mesa (April 2, 2016)
- The 11-32 is a hassle because it promotes no-downshifting behavior.
- Practice climbing with ass form since you are doing it asymmetrically.
- Very cheap to buy water at refilling stations.
- Commonwealth is not as scary as you think it is.

## Bike to UP (March 2, 2016)
- Warm up first before going all out, or stretch before, as you will get muscle pain
- 22-23kph is doable

## Centurion Challenge (February 27, 2016)
- Improving on climbing and descending :D
- House to Inang Valings/Antipolo Hospital (no traffic, relaxed pace) 1 hour 13 minutes
- Never ever ever forget your pump
- Really learn how to change a flat
- Going to Jariels climbs: To Inang Valings, to Palo Alto/radar, to Sierra Madre, 3 more Cat 3/4 climbs
- Jariels to Valing climbs: 4 including the fucking Radar climb in reverse
- Need better nutrition and saddle to deal with saddle sores
- New pedal is awesome
- Climbing training and core pa more, hard to maintain climbing position with a weak core
- Practice tempo of climbs
- Need Gatorade constantly. Electrolytes got depleted at some point
- Fitbars suck, Nutribars still rock
- Strategize for Audax how the hell you are going to deal with the Sampaloc climb

## Bike to Antipolo before work (February 25, 2016)
- Too high cadence on a granny gear will result in you getting gassed

## Bike to Sierra Madre (February 21, 2016)
- 80 psi tire pressure is too high, bottle dropped 10 times
- Descending, put your leg out on the direction you are curving to
- Sierra Madre Hotel categorized climbs: To Valings, to Palo Alto, to the radar, to the Sierra Madre Hotel
-

## Bike to Antipolo before work
- Shades are very easy to lose, don't hook them in your shirt collar

## Angeles Solo (February 14, 2016)
- Nutribars are good to eat when in transit, cut them up
- Buff is sometimes not needed over your neck it is too hot
- Don't leave your water bottle at random locations it might fall into the water lilies

## Bike to Agoo (January 23-24, 2016)

- 1st day, 180km (Fairview-Rosales) is doable if not that many stops since after Angeles its generally flats
- 2nd day, IT WAS SO HOT, get things wet and try not to stop in the middle of an urbanized area like Urdaneta
- Highest elevation change is from Pangasinan-La Union (Sison-Rosario), need an FD there
- Bike jersey is awesome get another one ASAP
- Need a better seat post to avoid chafing
- Need a rack bag because the backpack doesn't fit exactly on the rack
- Investigate why FD is so hard to shift
- Really watch out the road since you got semplang in Agoo part
- Get new cords for charging the phones, yours sucks
- Have to know how to eat while riding
- Don't forget protein drink after the ride
- Unused things: Compression shirt, buff, malong. Nice to have: Bike jersey for second day.
- Bike bottle holder GONE
- Possible eye protection that isn't sunglasses

## First Ride to Angeles (Sept 6 2015)

- Heat stroke is a bitch!
- You need more exercise and practice in biking/weaving through traffic.
- In general, jeepneys have weird habits (random swerving/stopping) so adjust accordingly.
- The rear derailleur is the most important and most vulnerable part of the bike.
- When putting the bike in bus, cover the RD with your helmet.
- Even without a full fold, you can put your bike at the back of your car.
- You need disciplined shifting. Ideally, you should have the same cadence the entirety of your ride.
- Figure out a way to insulate your water from the heat. Possibly put ice in there so it lasts longer.
- No need to carry a rain jacket. If it rains, then you get wet.
- Apply petroleum jelly liberally to your butt, it will get sore at some point.
- Try to hydrate before you even get on the bike.
- You need to acclimatize yourself when it comes to riding in the heat. If you aren't used to those temperatures, it will affect you and make it harder than for someone who is used to it.
- Replaced rear brake pads: 30 for the 2 pads (generic), 20 for the labor

## Random

- Put things you hold on your left hand
- Tune up @Iron Bike costs 100

## First Ride to UP/Office

- Kalayaan from Cubao is a long-ass uphill
- Prepare for hills by downshifting prematurely
- Increase height of seat (you should be able to stand over your bike just barely)
- Hard to breathe with a mask
- Camelbak Eddy is too big for the Topeak
- Don't wear boots if raining, wear slippers. :)

## House-Ortigas-White Plains-House

- Need to learn how to use a bike pump
- Now it makes sense why people have GPS on when you get lost
- Temple Drive is uphill
- EDSA bike lane is nice and there is nothing to fear but just bring a mouth mask for the pollution
- Don't use bikes if wheels are flat since the spokes can go
- Nearest bike shop is Glorious in Anonas
- Schwalbe Marathon tires to replace my tires
- The Anemos front fork folder jams
- It's really hard to bike up when you have a full backpack
- Always bring food, you were forced to do a Kowloon stop
