## 1 - 2 - Topic 2_ What do we mean by a virtual teacher

So you've probably heard many different terms for virtual education, online learning, distance learning, etc. They just mean learning from a distance and teacher from a distance. 

In the article I provided you called Two Types of Online Learning by Thomas Arnet. He makes the distinction between two groups of student learning online. One way students learn online is through instructional technologies, such as self guided infused web based programs that students learn from without any teacher or personal interface. The other is actual personal interface with an instructor. Virtual teachers not only use personal interaction to teach their online students, but they also utilize instructional technoligies to personalize instruction and get the best result for students. 

I've personally used instructional technologies in a couple of ways, based on what I'm teaching. I've used them during actual virtual lessons where I, maybe share my screen, show students how to work the programs, or how to do something. And then also we are, we work through some problems together. And I've also used them as an additional resource after the virtual lesson. And to, I've used them to asess what I've taught during the virtual lesson. So they can be used in a couple of different ways. 

So virtual teachers, teach at a distance in a couple of different ways. They can work entirely online, where they rarely or never see their students. Virtual teachers also work with blended programs. And blended programs there's lots of different ways that, that schools set up blended programs. But in general, the blended virtual teacher may see their students occasionally or for some part of each day. Third, in a flipped model, and we won't really be talking a lot about flipped model during this course, but that's where the brick and mortar teacher uses web-based programs and to instruct her students when they're not physically with him or her. 

So in this class we will focus on instruction for students who are not in the same physical location, and how to do that effectively. So really this session here, this first session, is really all about distinction. So amongst the different models of teaching virtually, there are also different ways to teach virtually. So, as you know, I work for Connections Learning and they, along with other completely virtual schools like K12, supply the curriculum. So we as virtual teachers do not create courses or content. What we do is we supplement, we enhance, and we personalize the curriculum for students. 

Some other completely virtual schools, they have, the teachers kind of double duty as eh, instructional designers as well, where they actually design their own courses and curriculum, and then teach virtually. I actually had two different grades that I worked with, and it, it's a really unique, blended model, and at the end of this I will give you a link so that you can see a video that the school did and get a better idea of, of what they're doing now. So they've really come a long way, as far as increasing their test scores, and student motivation, and things like that. 

In the next video we will discuss what impact technology has on the field of teaching, not just virtual teaching, but teaching in general. And the, I did provide you two videos.

## 1 - 3 - Topic 3_ What does the growth in technology mean for teachers

We can't get around it, technology and young people are intertwined. And so education must keep up with the way in which students acquire their knowledge, and with the speed of their learning. The greatest thing about technology and the use for students is that we can personalize use, personalize learning by utilizing technology. Students no longer have to be in a one size fits all learning environment. As we talked about in our last video, there are alternatives for students, now using technology in virtual learning. 

I've provided you with this four-minute video about the 21st century learner. It does a good job at covering where we are as educators and where students, students currently are with the growth of technology. Using technology, there's a shift away from the teacher-centric, passing information to students, toward the student-centric model. 

And that's what we do, is we personalize learning for students. Using technology, a school can personalize learning in a couple of ways. With, at first, in a completely online or blend, blended setting, students are generally moving at their own pace. If they need more time on a topic, they can have that time. They can reread texts, rewatch videos, etcetera. If a student understands and masters an objective quickly, they can move on just as quickly. 

Another piece of the personalization is the flexibility of time and space for students. Learning online takes away that need for the traditional brick-and-mortar classroom. Students now, with the use of technology, can get a high-quality education, working completely remotely, or part-time remotely, depending on what serves their learning best. Technology has brought about virtual and blended schools to offer personalization, and the virtual teacher continues this personalization, by understanding learners' individual needs and their interests. The work of the virtual teacher has to do with personalizing the learning, which we will talk quite a lot about during this course. As virtual teachers, many data sources are at our fingertips at all times. 

As I said, our virtual, our jobs as virtual teachers are to personalize learning. And one way we do that is by looking at where students are and what they need. I would look at student performance, and, but also attendance and participation. Hence, teachers coming from a brick and mortar environment were not used to using this type of data and were fairly uncomfortable with it. Most anyways. Now it, it data is common place and we, we couldn't do our jobs without it.

## 1 - 4 - Topic 4_ How do we learn to become virtual teachers

Currently most states do not have specific requirements to teach virtually. A standing teacher, a standard teaching certificate is most often required to teach it online, just as it would be to teach at a traditional brick and mortar school. I learned how to use the, a learning management system, and also my virtual classroom. And both, really by trial and error and from sharing with my colleagues. 

So one organization that has been instrumental in researching and documenting standards for effectiveness, in online teaching, is iNACOL. They began publishing national quality standards in 2007, and since have been fine tuning their resources to provide to virtual schools and teachers to better prepare teachers and schools to provide quality blended and online learning quality standards. I provided you with these teaching standards, in my, in the resources. And many programs and schools do use these as the industry standard of best teaching practices. 

In my own personal experiences interviewing and hiring virtual teachers over the years many often are just leaving these standard teacher preparation programs and have not had the training that they need to walk directly into the virtual teaching world. 

According to iNACOL's research, a national study of teacher education programs conducted in 2012, only 1.3% of them were preparing their teachers for next generation learning models. 

A few important points that they make are, to motivate students, to boost participation. And so, really that's you know, motivating students to come and participate in the virtual process. To always build a strong relationship with your students. To respond to students very quickly. To meet student's personal needs and learning styles To use the data available to personalize learning, and to change it up and make lessons fun. We'll be talking about all of those thing in this class. 

## 1 - 5 - Topic 5_ What do we use to teach online 

So two things that are rather essential to teaching virtually are an LMS, a Learning Management System that holds your curriculum, your student information et cetera, and a virtual classroom or meeting room where you can either record lessons for students to watch asynchronously, or teach a live session synchronously. 

But you might, as a virtual teacher you may encounter needing to decide on a learning management system that would work well for your school. And, there's some similar features to all of the learning management systems you see. And they are that they manage curriculum or training materials, they hold class roster and enrollment information, they manage student documentation, they a lot of times or normally have calendars, discussion forums and email. And you can also create assessments with them. 

Outside of a learning management system, that holds student information, a virtual teacher needs a platform to teach virtually. A virtual classroom such has Blackboard or Adobe has features that enable teachers to instruct students at a distance, either synchronously with student or asynchronously when you want to record lessons to send to students to view later. So again, although there are many out there, they share similar features, such as communication tools, webcam, microphone, things like that. Attendance features, you need to know who's there. Sharing features such as documentation sharing, collaboration tools such as breakout rooms, or whiteboard that students can use in the virtual classroom. Interactivity features if you need to raise your hand, laugh, clap, whatever. Audio features to show videos and play music. Assessment features like poll questions or actual quizzes. And reporting features such as attendance reports or assessment reports. So in your reading resources I have provided you with links to videos so that you can kind of peruse for yourself and, and see the different features of each program. Additionally, if, if you are in the position where you need to set up your own learning, online learning program, I have given you that link as well.

## 2 - 2 - Topic 1_ Who are your students

Today we're going to talk about, as a virtual teacher, who are your students? When preparing your learning environment, and getting ready for school to start, you may want to know who your students will be. 

There are two videos which show why students choose an alternative, or I'm sorry, nontraditional environment. And, we will go into more detail about this today. The, the video I provided you about a student leaving traditional education is a great example of a student, a virtual teacher may encounter, and that's what we're talking about today in this segment. Students who need an alternative to the traditional classroom. The main message of this video is that this student found an alternative that motivates him, which is truly the main idea of education. To get kids to be excited about learning. 

I chose a resource for you to read, which is a commencement speech at a virtual high school. It touched me personally because I've been to many virtual school graduation ceremonies, where I've seen students who may not have graduated if it weren't for an alternative educational option. And as Michael Horn says in the article, these are the students who are driving this educational revolution, because they did need a different educational option. They found one, and they were successful at it. 

So what types of students choose virtual school? Students who work. Maybe high school students who have jobs or child actors. In California, where I work, actors have always been a large part of our enrollment. Students pursuing a goal, such as athletes. I've worked with surfers, ice skaters, gymnasts, and even a Rubik Cube champion. Young parents or pregnant teens. Gifted students who cannot move forward quickly enough in a traditional school, or students with special needs that cannot be met at a traditional school. Students with health or medical issues. And students who either long term or short term, live in hospitals. Some, some families choose virtual school because of religious reasons. Many high school students choose this alternate option because they're trying to make up credits to graduate. And, for some students, the traditional school environment just isn't working. 

So why is it important to understand the reasons family choose, families choose virtual school? It's so you can better personalize their learning. Getting to know students schedules. I currently work with a top gymnast who cannot attend live sessions in the mornings. I'm sorry, in the afternoonsn actually, she can only attend in the mornings. She only works on schoolwork Monday through Thursday because she practices all day Fridays. And I've had students working in hospitals where they can't work every day, and there are times where they might go several days without a lo-, logging in or working at all. I've also worked with actors who have shooting schedules that vary from week to week. Many of these students work on schoolwork in the evenings and on weekends. That's always good to know, these schedules. I've also worked with many students who travel. Some of their parents travel on business, and some of these students work in between parent houses that may be in different states or even different countries. And some travel for different reasons. I actually have a family who, is, their whole family travels for a living. The parents are both travel writers. So, that's, it, it's always interesting every time I talk to them they're in different places and, always interesting to talk to. So I always keep plenty of notes on all my students so I know the best times to call, and I can plan my calls and my live lesson schedules accordingly. 

Knowing if your student is learning virtually because they're ahead, or were bored in class is also very helpful. Some students have the goal of finishing the year early if they're in grades K through eight, or high school students may have the goal of finishing their courses quickly and graduating early. If I see a student moving very quickly, it raises a red flag that they might not be able to understand the concepts well before moving on. But if I know that their goals are the move quickly, I can make sure that they're mastering concepts before moving on and I can open additional courses earlier, than for most other students. 

On the other side of that, some students change to a virtual school to catch up because they were struggling in traditional school. In addition to knowing students schedules and individual needs, there are a few other things to take into consideration when getting to know your students. What technology do they have? Some students live in rural areas, where they have either slow or spotty internet connection. Sometimes if they do have that spotty internet connection they may just need to listen to recorded lessons. Also, do they have a scanner or digital camera to turn in written or original work? When students are only turning in typed assignments, a teacher cannot properly assess the student's true abilities. Do they have a phone? Yes I do have students without phone service, and they're very difficult to reach. So in this case, we have specific days and times where they might have to travel outside their area, to have a telephone conversation.

## 2 - 3 - Topic 2_ What are you teaching

What are you teaching? When setting up your learning environment, you'll definitely want to dig into your curriculum and your standards and find out what you'll be teaching.

As we've discussed, there're are completely online schools and there are blended programs with varying degrees of face to face interaction. This affects what and how you will teach. Some programs purchase courses from a curriculum provider and some schools write their own courses. This affects the job of the virtual teacher.

In addition to a curriculum which students follow, there are two other components to teaching students in this situation. One is the synchronous components using a virtual classroom and the other are the use of web-based instructional tools that teachers can use to further personalize learning. In this situation, the virtual teacher does not alter the curriculum itself, but makes modifications or can remove some content if needed based on the situation. For example, if a fourth grade Math standard does not include measurement, but the curriculum does, the, that segment or unit or lessons can be removed, and they can replaced if needed with possibly synchronous lessons for a custom assessment added to the grade book. 

And like I said, I've provided you with a few resources on some different schools that, that utilize different curriculum. And like I said, this affects the job of the virtual teacher. This particular school uses a curriculum produced by the curriculum provider Plato. And is self directed and paced by the students. This, this really means that there's not a lot of involvement with the virtual teacher as the students progress through the curriculum. It's a mastery based program and the students can work as quickly or slowly as they need. At this particular school, teachers are available to students when needed, so they offer their assistance rather than write or supplement curriculum. 

The video I provided was to show how the role of the virtual teach, teacher differs when they are creating their own course content. The virtual teacher will work with an instructional designer, and guide, that guides her in developing the course, and decides which tools work best to reach students based on the class. To create an active rather than passive experience for her students. This particular teacher works online and face to face. 

And she mentions that working online has helped her with her face to face courses, as well by better understanding how to use online instructional tools to meet her course goals. She's able to show who she is to build community with them. It also makes her strive to communicate better online from creating these online courses. She also notes, interestingly enough, that her online students normally do better assessments than her face to face class. 

In another of the video resources I provided, you will see an example of an elementary virtual school and their curriculum is written by teachers as well. This adds an entirely new dimension to virtual teaching, where the curriculum is standard and developed for you. On the link provided, you are invited to visit a sample classroom and if you haven't already done that, I do recommend taking a look at the way the course is laid out and the instructional tools they use to reach their goals for their students. As I said, being a virtual teacher does not mean one single thing. You could be creating or co-creating your own courses and teaching them. It could be fully online or part time with face-to-face lessons as well. You could be following and personalizing, a given curriculum, or you could be helping students, who are following an online curriculum themselves. Regardless of the situation, virtual teachers need to know and understand their state standards and curriculum well, to be able to serve students in the best way possible.

## 2 - 4 - Topic 3_ How do we balance technology

This week, let's take a look at how virtual teachers use different tools to motivate students to master concepts. 

There needs to be a balance of online and offline activities, as well as a balance of online and offline hands on projects. Striking a balance could be the difference between the successful and non-successful course or even teacher. I've provided an article for you about how much time younger students should be spending online and the continued debate about this. This is probably one of the biggest questions I get, working in this environment, and criticisms, actually. People always are curious about how much time the virtual student actually spends online because almost no one agrees that a student should be online for the majority of the day. People speculate that because the student is in virtual school that all of their work is done online. And this is certainly not true and should not be true. If this is the case, it's actual, it's definitely the wrong virtual program. There should always be a balance and a blending of technology. And technology should enhance the curriculum and make it more personal and highly interactive, thereby motivating students. 

Technology also is not just about playing games. It's about using games to motivate and stimulate learners. The edweek article I provided continues the idea of balancing the amount of technology that is used for students, either in a virtual school or in a traditional classroom. This is just creating a custom playlist for learning, meaning using a variety of tools and activities to address individual student learning needs. The playlist includes synchronous lessons, games, group projects, one-on-one tutoring, field trips, virtual and traditional, if you are, near your students, as well as independent research. 

There are some activities in my curriculum that are open to interpretation, in terms of delivery. One example is a a cave model in our social studies class where students make a model of a cave. And I have received oh, and I leave this open to interpretation as far as the, them getting the projects to me. So I've received videos, digital pictures of 3D models, computer based models, hand drawn pictures, and written explanations. And I always enjoy seeing each student's interpretation of the assignment. And it gives me good insight to the student's learning style and what they enjoy. 

In speaking of creating a balance of learning activities, an example is, is if a student is struggling with geometry, a virtual teacher may have the option of providing supplemental assignments from, from a web-based instructional tool. So they may have the option of using the virtual classroom to help the student. And they may have the option of creating an offline project using manipulatives that will help the student understand and master the concept. So it's up to the teacher to figure out what works best with the struggling student. 

And which will the teacher choose? It really depends on the student. And that's why getting to know your students and understanding what they like and need is so important. Some students may thrive with online games, and you know that would be the best option for them mastering the content. Some would rather meet in a small group or one-on-one with you in your virtual classroom, where they can listen to your instruction and interact with you or some other students. Still, others would prefer an offline project. 

## 2 - 6 - Topic 4_ What are your class expectations 

If you want to set high academic, high academic expectations, we have to first set behavior expectations in any classroom. In a virtual class, the syllabus often sets the initial path, or road map to the course. It sets forth the expectations of the class, in terms of assignments. A good syllabus lets student, students know due dates, grading expectations, communication expectations, and other, and other important items. So that students can get a big picture of the course and manage their time accordingly. A well thought out and clear syllabus identifies the intended learning and criteria for success. 

Newsletters are a great way of communicating with your students. In the beginning of the year, when a new student, or when a new student begins, a syllabus can give a big picture of the course, but a newsletter is more personal. The newsletter can give students and families information about what your personal expectations and guidelines are for your class. For example, you might let students know when you're available or when your work hours are. If you have office hours or tutoring hours in your virtual classroom, for students to drop in. And also you want to let them know what your synchronous lesson times are. You may want to give students some guidelines for your synchronous sessions, such as, please be five minutes early to class. Or, we will begin promptly at 10 a.m., and you will not be able to enter the room later than ten, or five minutes later, or ten minutes later or, You know, whatever you decide. 

And, or for your virtual office hours, if you have a question make sure, if the student has a question, you might want to set the expectation that make sure they bring the lesson number, or the page number, with them and have a specific question ready. As well as their microphone. You may, may also put in some information on response time. For example, I will respond to all emails, phone messages, and discussion posts within 24 hours. Your tests and quizzes will be graded within two business days. And and, and things like that. So also, you want to make sure that they read your feedback, and the com, and your comments. And also, and, and this may or may not be the place. 

But you want to set rules and expectations for plagiarism, as well. What are the consequences for first offense, a second, a third? Like I said, this might not be in, in the newsletter. It could be in another area, possibly the syllabus, or message boards. You may also want to put in naming conventions for turning in work, how students should head papers, what students will, should do if they miss live sessions. Will they watch a recording, complete a study guide? These are just some ideas of different things, different expectations and standards that you may set in your class. 

So although a virtual teacher's time spent on behavior problems is minimal, expectations in the virtual in virtual synchronous sessions, still needs to be set. Behavior standards will vary by age of students. Also by their experience in a virtual setting and the mix of students you'll have. You'll often times change your rules based on your year, based on your students that year. So most of my virtual teaching has been done with elementary-age students, and I have had some behavioral issues which affect both the flow of the lesson and the behaviors of the other students. 

Students are normally very excited to participate in live sessions with their teacher and other students. So the main thing I do, is I keep students active without, with very little down time. And this is because they sometimes will begin chatting in the chat pod, get off topic, they get very excited. And they don't, they're not paying attention. One other thing I do is I allow, I usually allow students the first five or ten minutes of the lesson. And even the last five, to kind of play around a bit, a bit, socialize, chat with other students, maybe draw on the white board, use their webcam. But the expectation is set, that this is a privilege, and, and done only during this time. 

Once the lesson begins, we stay on topic. And this is very similar to what a teacher in a face-to-face setting would do as well. The one thing that is different, is that the virtual teacher can take whatever out of the room that is distracting, such as the chat feature, the microphones, or the web cams, or even the student. I actually don't like to remove features myself, because they are important to the lesson. So I just make sure that I set my expectations in the beginning of the room. 

So, as I mentioned, I've worked with students in blended settings, where they're all together in a computer lab or library, doing a lesson with me, from a distance. And this type of situation can be more challenging, because all the students know each other, and they like to amuse themselves while they're together and I'm in a different state often times. So a couple of ways. One way that I, that I use with my students in Detroit, are to keep them on track, were, were colors. So on the right hand corner of each of my slides I had a color dot, and I had a key in the corner, to what the colors meant. This was helpful to keep the students on track. And they enjoyed seeing what color was on the slides. To see what they'd be doing. And this is just an example. I did it differently. I used the key differently, based on the lesson I was teaching. additionally, so a lot of virtual teachers too, they, they leave their rules and expectations up in the corner of their virtual classrooms, at all times. 

So no matter what you're teaching, no matter what you are teaching, setting standards and expectations for students helps you better achieve academic results with them. Additionally setting high, high but realistic expectations for students is just as important. Also setting expectations for yourself to model responsible behavior, such as being on time with your lessons and ready to go. Also responding to students in a professional and prompt manner, and being just as respectful to students as they should be to you, are all critical factors in working with kids of any age. I've included for you in our Resources, a post on our Connections Academy Blog, about learning coaches and how they can help their students navigate virtual classroom sessions. But I think it also gives some good advice to the virtual teacher as well in terms of expectations. So thank you for joining me. In our next session, we will look at what a day in the life of a virtual teacher looks like. See you next time.

## 2 - 5 - Topic 5_ A day in the life of a virtual teacher

Something that I always do first and throughout the day is take care of student and family issues and questions. Because many of my students are in different time zones, and some, three hours different from me. I normally wake up to most of my problems and questions of the day. The questions range from: disputing an auto-graded quiz question, to problems understanding an assignment, to technical questions, perhaps like not being able to access an I-text. All teachers have duties that they take care of for their school outside of their teaching responsibilities and virtual teaching is no different. 

During the day I may have to write a newsletter article, possibly plan a professional development session, development session, or plan a field trip. There are also meetings to attend, whole school meetings, grade level planning meetings, et cetera. And of course, there's grading. In an online world, grading can range from very small auto-graded quizzes that just need to be reviewed, to larger essays and projects. It varies greatly how much time I spend grading and giving feedback each day. Planning my weekly live sessions does take a great deal of time throughout my week, just as lesson planning in a traditional face-to-face environment does. Although I do have a tentative long term plan, it often needs to be adjusted to fit the needs of the student. 

One thing that the virtual teacher does do differently than in a face-to-face environment is the need to remind students of the live lessons. And they do this in various ways, through email, newsletters, phone calls, message board posts, however you can get those students there, that's often working on scheduling and getting students to attend is a continuous job of, the virtual teacher. 

Personalizing instruction by using technology is what we do as virtual teachers. And this was, this is a big thing that we do throughout our day, is that we use the data to see how students are progressing in a course or, or in their courses probably one to two times a week. And I check to see if the students are on track to complete their course on time. And if they're going to be successful. And if they're not, what I, I find out what I can do to make sure they finish on time and successfully. If they're either not finishing on time or not doing well in the course, I need to find out why. In finding out what the problem is I want to know, are they struggling or stuck on something? Often many students will not reach out to their teachers if they're having trouble. So, that's something that I need to do. Could I help by modifying a lesson in any way? Maybe provide an alternative approach based on the student's learning style? Possibly it's technology; are they having a problem with not understanding the system? Okay, that's all I have for you today please take a look at the resources, have a nice weekend, and I will see you next week. Bye-bye.