# Week One (Module 1)

## 1.1: Introduction

Astrobiology forces us to address philosophical questions that strike at the very core of our civilization. If the answer to this question is, no, we are not alone in the universe, we're also faced with some very fascinating questions. What is the nature of this other life on other planets? Is it microbial life? Life like bacteria? And, if so, how does it compare to life on Earth and where is it? Or is it intelligent life? And if it is intelligent life, what is the nature of this other intelligence? Can we communicate with it? And what will be the consequences if we do communicate with it? Are we alone in in the Universe is unquestionably the one question in astrobiology that fires the imagination of the general public. And it's probably the question that brought you a long to this course. It's a very reasonable question to ask. When you think about the Universe that we live in. 

The planet on which we live orbits a single star and this star is one of about 200 billion stars in the Milky Way galaxy. And our own galaxy is probably one of many, many billions of galaxies throughout the Universe. In truth we don't know how many galaxies there are in the Universe, it may be something on the order of 100 billion galaxies maybe more, but if you think about it 200 billion stars in our own galaxy, possibly 100 billion galaxies throughout the universe, it seems reasonable to ask the question is there life on other planets? And that is why astrobiology is concerned with a question for yet which we do not have an answer, but which scientifically, empirically looks like a reasonable question to ask. 

To search for life on other planets, we first of all have to understand something about life on our own home planet, Earth. This is a rather beautiful image taken by the Apollo 11 astronauts on the surface of the moon. And it shows the Earth hovering above the horizon of the moon. It's sometimes called the Blue Marble image. Because it shows a picture of the Earth as a tranquil planet, it looks like a very peaceful place. For this belies the history of life on Earth and the future of life on this planet. For example, we know that planet Earth has been struck by large pieces of rock in its past. Astroid and comet impacts that have done devastating things to life on the surface of the earth. We think, for example, that the dinosaurs were made extinct by such an asteroid impact 65 million years ago. Now, whether an asteroid really did kill the dinosaurs, is something that is controversial in some parts of the scientific community. But whatever one's views about this, the fact that scientists proposed that the extinction of the dinosaurs was caused by an asteroid, shows that in order to understand the past history of life on Earth, we have to understand its connection with the cosmic environment. What sort of rocks might come from outer space and threaten life on the Earth? 

In a few billion years from now, our Sun will come to the end of its life. And, at that point, our own planet will be completely destroyed and all life on it will be extinguished. That's not for a long time to come. But we do know that, in order to understand the future of life on a planet, its long term future, we must think about the connection of a planet, again, with its cosmic environment, how it connects with the history of its parent star and how long that star lives, and therefore, how long you can expect life to survive on a planet. So in order to understand life on Earth, we have to understand the past history of life and its connection with the cosmic environment. And we have to understand the future of life on earth and its connection with the cosmic environment. In other words, an understanding of life on earth is really about studying astrobiology, the connection of life with its astronomical or cosmic environment. 

Astrobiology is first interested with understanding the origin of life on this planet, how did it come about? And the sorts of questions that astrobiologists ask and that we'll be looking at in this course, are how did life originate on this planet? Where did life originate? What where the locations of the first organisms to emerge on this planet; where might they have first evolved? Is life an inevitable process on any planet where the conditions are good enough? Do you always get an evolution of life? Is this a common process throughout the Universe? When did this happen? Did it happen very quickly after the Earth was formed, or did it take rather a long time for those chemical reactions to lead to the earliest types of life? And what is the evidence for early life on earth? What is the evidence for the origin of life on this planet and its emergence into early single-celled organisms that first occupied this planet many billions of years ago. Once we've established the presence of life on a planet, we want to know about its limits. How far can you push it, and what sort of extremes can it live in? This is important if we're to try and understand the possibilities of life on other planets, to assess their habitability, as we call it. And the sorts of questions that astrobiologists want to address are, what are the limits of life? What are the most extreme physical and chemical environments that life can survive and grow in? How does life survive extremes? What are the sorts of mechanisms that it evolves? What sort of biochemistry, what sort of physiology do organisms evolve in order to be able to cope with some of the most extreme environments on the earth? And are these limits universal? If we do find life on another planet out there in the universe, will it be living in completely conditions from life on Earth? Or will we in fact find similar life living in similar types of environments? And once we've looked at life in extremes, what does that tell us about the prospects for life elsewhere? About the possibilities that going to extreme environments on other planets and finding life there? So by studying life on our planet today, and looking at the way in which it lives in different types of environments and different extremes, we can learn something about the prospects for life elsewhere. 

Astrobiology as I've already mentioned is also concerned with trying to understand the history of life on earth once it did emerge, it's concerned with questions like, how is life related? When you walk around outside you see a whole diversity of life from dogs to giraffes to trees, how are all these different creatures related? And how die they come to be on the surface of the earth? And how did they evolve? Astrobiology is interested in trying to understand the connections between these different creatures and how they came to be and evolved from one another over time. We also want to know about multi cellular life, complex life. We'll see later in this course, that, when you look around you most the life you and I are familiar with, are things like dogs and giraffes that are multi-cellular creatures, complex large organisms that we can see with the naked eye. But in fact much of life on Earth is bacteria, archaea, simple single celled organisms. And we want to understand as astrobiologists how life emerged from those more simple organisms in the early history of life on Earth to the more complex life that you and I see on a day to day basis on the surface of the planet. 

And another question that concerns astrobiologists is catastrophes and extinctions. How does life go extinct? How do these catastrophes affect life throughout its history? Whether that be asteroid or comet impacts, giant volcanic eruptions and what sort of catastrophes might befall life along it's long tenure on life on Earth? 

Astrobiology is concerned with taking this information and looking for life elsewhere. And as I said earlier, there's no doubt that this is the most interesting question in astrobiology. At least the one that captures the public imagination. And the sorts of questions that astrobiologists ask once they've begun to get an understanding of life on the Earth is, is there life elsewhere in the Universe? Are we a unique experiment in biological evolution, or is it repeated on other planets? And if there is life elsewhere, what does it look like? What sort of life is it? Is it microbial life, single celled life, or is it intelligent life? And if there isn't any life out there in the universe, why not? What's missing in the rest of the universe that was present on the Earth, that allowed life to originate and evolve on this planet. 

Of course, following on from that question, another interest for astrobiologists but certainly for the general public is are there other intelligences in the universe. ? If there is life out there, could it be intelligent life? And the sorts of questions that astrobiologists want to address is, is intelligence inevitable? Wherever we get life on a planet, is it inevitable that it will eventually progress to intelligent types of lifeforms? Can we communicate with life on other planets? And if we do communicate with it, what would be the consequences for society? What would happen to us if we made contact with another intelligences? How would that affect religion and our social structures? And we'll answer of those questions In this course. 

Of course it's all very well looking for alien life and studying the evolution of life on the Earth and going out and hunting for life elsewhere, but of course we may eventually ourselves leave the Earth and travel beyond and establish permanent settlements on places like the Moon and Mars. And astrobiology is also concerned with the technical question of how human beings will establish themselves in space, what is the future of human life beyond the Earth? The sorts of questions that astrobiologists are concerned with span from science to technology to philosophy, and the sorts of questions are things like, Will humans leave the earth? Is it inevitable that we will move on beyond the Earth and establish a presence beyond our home planet? And if we do make this choice to leave the Earth, how will we do it? How will we establish self-sustaining settlements on other planets? And if we are going to spend money and human resources establishing other branches of civilization beyond the Earth and other planets, how do we do that but at the same time preserve the Earth? How do we look after our own planet, live sustainably on the Earth but establish sustainable settlements on other planets and planetary bodies such as the Moon and Mars. And how will we adapt to space? If we move out beyond the Earth what will be the social implications for humanity? How will we change as a species? How will our societies develop as we move out beyond the earth and establish settlements on other planetary bodies? 

Hopefully what you've learnt is that astrobiology covers many fields. It's a very diverse subject that goes from physics to chemistry, biology, and even philosophy and sociology when we think about the implications of discoveries in astrobiology. 

## 2.2: History of Astrobiology

People have been contemplating the possibility of habitable worlds, for a long time. This is a really rather remarkable statement by Metrodorus, an ancient Greek philosopher. Who was actually a student of Democritus, who first proposed the atomic theory of matter. And this is in loose translation of what he said. He said, it would be strange if a single ear of corn grew in a large plain, although only one habitable world in the infinite. Metrodorus was expressing the idea that if you go into a field it's very unusual to see one ear of corn growing in the middle of a field with no other corn around it. Generally if you go into a field and you see corn you'll see a lot of it. And he wondered if there is life on this planet, then surely there must be other worlds with life as well. Well, the ancient Greeks didn't quite have the same perception as the heavens that we do. They don't under, they didn't understand about planets, and they didn't understand the nature was of other stars. But nevertheless this was a remarkable statement for people thinking in early years astrobiology over 2,000 years ago about the possibility of inhabited worlds. As we go on through history we find other speculations that are just as remarkable. 

In the 16th century during the Renaissance this was a statement made by Giordano Bruno, who was an astronomer speculating about the possibility of planets beyond Earth. And it's worth reading what he said. He said in space there are countless constellations, suns, and planets, we only see the suns because they give light. The planets remain invisible for they are small and dark. There are also numberless Earth's circling around their suns. Now if you think about this statement today, in an age where we are beginning to detect Earth-like planets around other stars, this is a truly remarkable speculation for the 16th century. 

The invention of the telescope allowed us to go beyond these speculations, to see planets around other stars, and to start to form more empirical ideas about whether other planetary bodies could sustain life. And you might think that once the telescope had been invented there would be a lot less speculation, because now we'd have real data about other planetary bodies on which we could base ideas and speculations. But in fact, remarkably, completely the opposite happens now we have telescopes, we can see other planetary bodies. But we don't have enough information to know what their environments are like. So now we've got all these new planets on which we can speculate about the presence of other life. And the invention of the telescope of Galileo, and you can see here one of the first images that he looked at, which was the moons Jupiter, the four largest moons of Jupiter, now called the Galilean moons of Jupiter. This invention of the telescope and its widespread use led to the discovery of planets that caused speculation to run riot during the Enlightenment. This is a speculation by the famous scientist William Hershel, who wrote, whilst observing the moon, by reflecting a level on the subject I'm almost convinced that those numberless small Circuses we see on the moon are the works of the Lunarians and may be called their Towns. Herschel was observing asteroid craters on the moon, craters that seemed almost perfectly circular. So circular, they couldn't have possibly have been formed by natural processes. The must be the work of an intelligence, and he believed that the moon might be inhabited by Lunarians, who were constructing these fortifications on the moon. And even Christian Huygens, famous astronomer, observed spots on Venus, Mars, and Jupiter. Spots that we now know are features of storms and, and deserts on the surface of Mars. And he concluded there were clouds and water and he stated, the taste of music with the inhabitants of Venus and Jupiter is at a high level, similar to that Frenchmen or Italians. 

Now these observations today seem crazy to us and they seem crazy particularly because they came from extremely erudite scientists that achieved remarkable things in their field. But it shows how with a very limited set of data people began speculating about life on other planets and I should say that these speculations are also a warning from the past. A warning about being too optimistic in astrobiology and we should be careful today in learning the lessons from our forebears about over speculation with very little data. Even in the 20th century, speculation runs riot. Percival Lowell the Astronomer who observed lines across the surface of Mars, an optical processing trick of the human brain which he interpreted to be canals, built by a dessicated dying civilization on Mars, trying to channel water from the polar icecaps to the equatorial regions of Mars. And he observed these canals over and over again. So convinced was he, he wrote this Every opposition is added to the assurance that canals are artificial, both by disclosing their peculiarities better and better and by removing generic doubts as to the planet's habitability. 

We now know, of course, there are no canals on Mars. Percival Lowell was deluded by his observations. But it shows that even in the 20th century people thought there might be intelligences on other planets in our solar system. Aliens still grip the human imagination. You only have to watch films produced by Hollywood and other production companies around the world. Aliens are pervasive throughout popular culture, from Star Wars to The Extraterrestrial, to the War of the Worlds, and on and on it goes, a long list of aliens that we've seen in films. 

So you can see how, optimism about astrobiology in particular intelligent life still grips the human imagination and __we have to be very careful to separate what our imagination wants us to believe and what the data, what the knowledge that we have from telescope and missions, is really telling us.__

In the 1950's and early 1960's, the space age began to unfold, and with it, the possibility of sending spacecraft to other planets. And we started to get views from spacecraft orbiting Mars and Venus. And these views were rather depressing. No evidence of civilizations, not even any evidence for simple life forms, even microbial life on these planets. And so the early years of the space age, were a period where people began to backtrack in their optimism about life beyond Earth. 

But ironically, as these spacecraft improved, and as our cameras improved, we began to see details. Details that suggested that we might not be quite as negative, as we thought we needed to be in the early years of the space age. People began to see valley networks on the surface of mars, outflow channels that suggests liquid water on the early surface of that planet and now, we know quite conclusively, that there was much more abundant liquid water on the surface on Mars early in its history. And as we saw earlier in this course, liquid water is necessary for life as we know it. So the presence of liquid water on the early history of Mars, in the early history of Mars suggests that this is a planet that may have been habitable for life. 

As the space age developed, so astrobiology has moved into perhaps a more optimistic stage of considering the possibility of life beyond Earth. What were the other developments that allowed astrobiology to make the transition from a philosophical and speculative science in ancient Greece and in the Renaissance. To an empirical science constrained by data. 

Urey and Miller experiment: Organic compounds + electricity = amino acids.

1970s: The Arecibo Dish in Puerto Rico sent out signals in Binary code the included a diagram of DNA, a map of the solar system, the numbers 1 to 10.

#### Possible Life?
-Mars had flowing water over 3B years ago.
- Enceladus, Saturn: There are geysers erupting from the south pole of this moon, throwing out water and other elements into sapce.
- Titan, Saturn: Rocks made of icy water. Rivers are made of liquid hydrocarbons.
- We have searched for Earth-like planets around other stars.

## 3 - 3 - 1.3 What is Life

#### What is Life?
- What are we actually looking for in the rocks?
- Huge implications for "when is a human alive".
- Life has complexity.
- Life has growth.
- Life replicates.
- Life metabolizes.
- Life seems to evolve by Darwinian evolution.
- Gerald Joyce: Life is a self-sustaining chemical system capable of undergoing Darwinian evolution.

#### Non-life stuff also possess features of life.
-  Tornados have complex behavior but they are not alive.
-  Salt crystals can grow.
-  Computer programs can replicate and evolve.
-  Fire metabolizes and releases energy. Same reaction with our body (C + O -> energy).

#### Life stuff possess features of non-life.
- Viruses cannot replicate on their own.
- A single rabbit cannot replicate on its own. 
- There is no really physical or chemical characteristic about life that we can use to define what it is.

Natural kinds vs. non-natural kinds. Gold = natural because its properties are defined. Chair = non-natural because a chair is defined by people. When you sit on a table, it it a chair? When you eat on a chair, is it a table?

Life is the same. It defines part of chemistry that we like to think of as encapsulating our ideas of life. It's really just an empty human definition, but nevertheless, a definition that's important for astrobiology.

#### History
- Materialism (Empedoceles, Greece): Life has a soul, and this soul is made of atoms of fire.
- Vitalism: Life contains some vital force, and when you add this to something non-biological, it becomes biological. Spontaneous generation. Disproven..

## 3 - 4 - 1.4 Life on Earth - [13_19]

The majority of the biomass on earth is microscopic, bacteria.

Microbes are important bcause they are the most likely forms of life that we find on another planet. They can live in high temperature, high radiation, extreme acid, and so on. These extremes define the boundaries of life on our planet. They define the boundary of the biosphere. Temp, pH, dessication.

Biosphere is very thin. Inwards to the crust: Life cannot exist in environments hotter than 122C. Upper limit in the sky: Solar radiation. There are microorganisms in the clouds though. It's important to know the limits as a benchmakr so we can compare to other plantes.

## 3 - 5 - 1.5 Structure of Life_ Building Blocks - [9_42]

Life: CHeNOPS.

## 3 - 6 - 1.6 Structure of Life_ Cells - [14_22]

#### Three Major Features
- Membrane to enclose chemical reactions.
- Information storage system: Encoding instructions, transmitting info from 1 generation to another.
- System for gaining energy. Photosynthesis, heterotrophy (eating organic molecules), microorganisms that get their energy from FUCKING ROCKS. The process behind this is extracting energy from atoms and molecules to provide the enrgy for cell replication and cell growth.

# Week One (Module 2)

## 4 - 1 - 2.1 Origins of Life_ Building Blocks - [11_28]

#### How did the building blocks came to be?
- __Supernatural or divine intervention.__ This doesn't explain how the building blocks of life were created and how they were assembled. 
- __It originated elsewhere.__ The problem is that if life came from another planet, then that planet would be conducive for life, too. Hard to prove.
- __Life originated on the Earth.__ 

Amino acids are everywhere in the universe. We find them in meteorites that land on the surface of the Earth. It turns out that these meteorites also contain amino acids that are not used by biology. It seems that life has selected a subset of the available amino acids to be found in the extraterrestrial environment.

What does all this tell us? It tells us that the building blocks of life could have, could have been produced on the Earth endogenously in chemical reactions on the surface of the early Earth. And it also tells us that the building blocks of life could have arrived on the Earth in extraterrestrial materials in meteorites.

Where do nucleic acids come from? DNA is close to RNA and RNA can self-assemble into ribozymes, and these ribozymes can carry out chemical reactions, even including self-replication. 

How do you get memberanes? Experiments suggest that you can produce membranes very, very easily. Lipids from meteorites + water = Hydrophilic thingie.

And it remains one of the great challenges in astrobiology. To understand that transition from the chemical world to the biological world. So what have we learned in this lecture? 

## 4 - 2 - 2.2 Origins of Life_ Location - [11_53]

Where did these early reactions occur? 

#### Things needed for origin of life
- Energy source to do the chemical reactions.
- A means of concentrating molecules (without membranes).
- An environment that's conducive to these complex molecules and their assembly once they've been made.

#### Possible Locations?
- __Deep sea vents.__ Energy comes from hot fluids/crust.
- __Craters.__ There were more asteroid and comet impacts onto the early Earth than today. When they hit, they heat up rocks (source of energy), heat up water (environment), and the crater itself might be the pond of shit. Then the crater cools down yay.
- __Beaches.__ Tides cause water/stuff to concentrate.
- __Volcanic hot springs.__ Energy comes from crust, chemicals collect in the hot springs.
- __Bubbles.__ When a volcano erupts under the sea, gasses (H, CH4, CO) are enclosed in bubbles.
- __Outer space.__
- __Multiple?__

The most primitive microorganisms are the heat lovers. So ancient microbes that love heat might like that but not the next stages of life.

## 4 - 3 - 2.3 Origins of Life_ Alternative Chemistries - [11_04]

We assume that life is C-based. C has a lot of possible bond types, and its compounds are chemically stable.

Alternative is Si-based. But Si forms stable compounds with O. This is bad because it prevents Si from engaging with other chemical compounds. Maybe possible if a planet is Si-based and low O but Si has too great a propernsity to form reactions with O and form stable silicates for it to be useful in the origin of life. Si is also very reactive, more than we'd like.

Gasses are too inactive to be the basis of life. ), N, B, other types of atoms have a limited number of bonds. Mg, Ca, K, Na form ionic bonds.

Life also needs a solvent to carry out the rxns. On Earth that's liquid water. It dissolves many chemicals readily. It expands when freezes, so ice rises to the top, which can lead to frozen lakes. If ice is heavier than water than ponds would freeze through completely. Liquid H2O has a wide temp range, we can see them in the polar regions and in the hot springs. So we can make reactions there.

Ammonia? At low temps it readily dissolves many chemicals similar to aminos. Problem is low temp range: liquid from -78 to -34. It sinks when it freezes.

HF? Wide temp range (-83 to 20). But F is rare in the universe, 100K times less abundant than O to form compounds.

Some people have said that our idea of carbon-based life forms using liquid water is just a very narrow Earth-centered view of life and that on other planets, we would expect to find life with entirely novel biochemistries, almost unimaginable to us. But, in fact, when we go to other planets in our solar system, we don't observe unusual life forms. Are we prejudiced for C-based H2O-solvent life forms?

A future challenge in astrobiology is to really determine if we can make life based of different chemicals, not just C and H2O.

## 5 - 1 - 3.1 Formation of the Solar System - The Early Earth

The solar system formed like all star systems in the universe, in a molecular cloud. A molecular cloud is a region of the universe where hydrogen, helium and some other elements reach densities that are high enough for structure to begin to form. And for the clouds to begin to collapse under their own weight. 

As the clouds begin to collapse under their own gravitational influence, some of this material forms a protostar, which is a region of much higher density at the center of a nebula swirling around this star. Structures begin to form in these nebula. And the new solar winds being generated by this early star is pushing the material out and forming these outflows around the nebula. So structure begins to form in the molecular cloud as well as the star at the center. 

The most crucial event in the formation of a star system in the ignition of the nuclear furnace inside the center of that protostar in middle of the nebula. And this occurs by a process called nuclear fusion. This is an example of a reaction of nuclear fusion where deuterium is fusing with tritium and forming helium and also a neutron. And in that process, much energy is released. The nuclear furnace is ignited, and the star produces light and energy. And it's this light and energy that will be responsible for driving the rest of the processes that are occurring in this nebula as planets begin to form. Beyond the star in the nebula, material begins to coalesce and form planets. 

Beyond the line called ice line volatile like water, hydrogen, helium begin to coalesce and become giant gas planets such as Jupiter, and Saturn in our own solar system. In the inner regions of that nebular, smaller pieces of rock begin to coalesce. These planetesimals come together and eventually form small rocky planets like Venus, Earth, and Mars. So there's a very distinctive separation in the types of planets that can be formed in nebulae. 

Now of course it's worth saying that things are not quite this simple. Planets can also migrate. It's thought, for instance, that Uranus and Neptune have migrated in their past. And the solar system will also pick up rocky debris in the outer regions of the nebula. But in the inside of the solar system, in the inner regions of that solar system, the terrestrial rocky type planets will form like the Earth. And once Earth had formed, the stage was then set for conditions to become better and more appropriate for life.

## 5 - 2 - 3.2 Conditions on the early Earth - [7_04]

Once the earth had formed in the early nebula, the stage was then set for the emergence of life. But what were the conditions like, on the early earth, and how do we know what those conditions were like? Well, the earth formed 4.56 billion years ago, but some of the earliest rocks that we have on the earth are between about 4 billion years to the 3.8 billion years old. So the problem we have, that there is about 11% of the Earth's history that is missing in the geological record, and that record that we do have, is very sparse. 

But nevertheless, those ancient rocks that we have do tell us something about conditions on the early Earth and what those conditions might have been like, for early life as it emerged. Some of the oldest rocks are from the Isua region, of western Greenland. And these are rocks that were made up of ancient sediments on early earth, about 3.8 billion years ago. And they've subsequently been pressurized and heated, over the many billions of years, in which those rocks have been subducted into the crust of the earth and then re-exposed. So they're very altered. But, nevertheless, we can tell something about those rocks, and what the conditions might have been like, on early earth. And if we look at those Isua rocks, we find evidence of a number of different types of rocks that might have existed in those original ancient sediments. 

First of all, we find evidence of limestones. And limestones are essentially carbonates laid down today in modern marine environments, for example, in shallow environments around the edges of the coast. Limestones tend to suggest the presence of liquid water. 

We also find metamorphosed sandstones. Sand stones are essentially coarse, sand if you'd like, that's conglomerated together, and formed a rock. It's become lithified, it's formed a rock. And, suggests as well presence of water in environments. Sand stones are sedimentary rocks, sediments that are laid down in environments where there is water. For example, in shallow rivers or shallow marine environments. 

And there's also some evidence in these ancient rocks of pillow larvaes. Pillow lavas are formed when basalt, which is volcanic rock, is erupted in a volcanic eruption, and comes into contact with water. For example, at the bottom of the oceans. And as soon as that lava comes into contact with water, it's instantly quenched and solidifies. Forming these shapes that look a bit like pillows. Hence its name, pillow lava. 

So pillow lava, lime stones and sand stones, remnants of these sorts of rocks and the isua in rocks, suggest that there was liquid water on the early Earth, at least by 3.8 billion years ago, and probably before. There's other evidence as well. 

But, the point about this, evidence is it shows that the early Earth might have been quite similar to the present day Earth, in the sense that there were bodies of liquid water available for life to emerge in possibly oceans. When we look at all the evidence of, early rocks and the rock record. It tells us several things about the earth 3.8 billion years ago. It tells us that the earth had bodies of, of water, much like the present day earth. 

It also tells us that there was exposed land that was being weathered, and producing sediments that may have been responsible for some of these rocks like sand stones. Sandstones are composed of quartz. Suggesting there were continental areas that were being weathered and producing that quartz. It was then washing out into the oceans, and forming part of those now ancient rocks that we, we find in Greenland. These sorts of processes if they were occurring then, suggest that the Earth at this time had similar geological processes that we're familiar with today. For example, plate tectonics. Plates being subducted, and then reformed and rewrought. And these sedimentary rocks being formed in the hydrological process. It was occurring on early Earth. 

And this suggests that the Earth also had internal layering. A differentiation of the different parts of the earth from the core, through the mantle, through to the crust. It suggests that the structure of the earth is much like present day earth. So, at least in terms of the presence of liquid water, the presence of land masses, the earth might have been somewhat similar to present day earth about 3.8 billion years ago. The sort of environment that we think might have been condusive to life. 

What about the other characteristics of the planet that are important for biology? Well, we can learn something about the early atmosphere, and we'll talk about Oxygen in the atmosphere later on in this course. But the rock record tells us that if there was liquid water there, the temperature must have been within the range that's suitable for life. If there was liquid water, then the temperature must have been between freezing and maybe a few tens of degrees, to allow that liquid water to persist on the surface of the planet. That suggests that the temperature conditions were suitable for life. 

We know from the rock record that the early atmosphere only had trace quantities of oxygen. Today those, concentrations of oxygen at 21%. In the early history of the Earth, the oxygen concentrations would've been much less than .1%. And so the atmosphere was very different from today. Carbon dioxide would've been much more abundant. And there would have been more Methane as well. Some of that Methane, perhaps, being produced by biology. But, both Carbon Dioxide and Methane are greenhouse gases, and they would have contributed to warming the surface of the Earth at that time. 

Why is this important? Well, we know that the sun was less luminous than it is today. The early sun was perhaps about 25% less luminous than it is today. Which means that it would have been imparting less heat to the Earth during that time. And one question that's been raised is, if the sun was less luminous than today, why didn't the Earth just freeze over? Why wasn't the Earth too cold for life and liquid water 3.8 billion years ago? And one answer to that paradox, that's being called the faint young sun paradox, is that carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and methane, 2 greenhouse gases, would have warmed up the surface of the Earth and provided conditions that would have been clement for liquid water. And that warming effect would have compensated for the cooler young sun, in that early history of the Earth. 

And so the presence of these gases may have been very important, not just for warming the earth and keeping it much, warmer than today. And, and providing the liquid water environments that early life would have required. But they might have also been important for life itself. Carbon dioxide would have provided a source of carbon for early lifeforms in the oceans and on the earl, early land masses. So we know that the atmosphere was very different than today. 

This also has consequences for one other physical factor that's very important for life, ultraviolet radiation. There was no ozone shield before. Microbes probably would have meant that they would have had to have shielded themselves. Perhaps by living inside rocks, or living beneath layers of microbes that would have protected them from the ultraviolet radiation. Microbial mats, those top layers of microbes would have acted as sacrificial layers, to protect the microbes underneath from the intense ultraviolet radiation. So this could've been one factor that was very different on the early earth. 

Some people have speculated that the high concentrations of methane in the atmosphere of the early earth might have reacted with sunlight and formed a hydrocarbon smog. And that smog of complex organic carbons, could have streamed out ultraviolet radiation. So there may have been other ways on early earth in which that intense ultraviolet radiation was screened out. But in the worst case scenario, the UV radiation would have been 1000 times higher than today. This would have been a challenge, for early life. 

Another challenge that was very prevalent on early Earth was higher, numbers of asteroid and comet impacts on the surface of the early Earth. We know that there was a large number of impacts between about 4.1 and 3.8 billion years ago. A much higher rate of impact than on the surface of present day Earth. Perhaps many orders of magnitudes, many tens of times higher than the present day Earth. How do we know that? Well we know that by looking at the moon. The moon preserves a record of impacts from the early solar system. And the large number of craters that you can see on the moon, that you can see with your own eye, by looking up at the moon in the night sky, you can see those craters. They are the evidence of intense bombardment in the early history of our solar system. And we call this period, the late heavy bombardment. It would have been a period that was very challenging for life. Because those impacts would have heated up habitats. Probably made some places too hot for life to have been able to tolerate the physical conditions caused by asteroid and comet impacts. So the emergence of life had to, occur in this very challenging environment of, heavy asteroid and comet impacts. 

So, what we see in this picture, is an early Earth that's somewhat similar to the present day Earth. Bodies of liquid water, oceans, probably early continental land masses. But things were very different as well. A very different atmospheric composition. Much more challenging environment with higher levels of asteroid and comet impacts. And also high level of volcanism. Volcanic activity would have been much greater on the early Earth. But this was the setting, in which the first life forms emerged on our planet. 

So what have we learnt? We've learnt that the geological record gives us our main clues about the conditions of early Earth. We've learned that over 10% of that record is missing. But nevertheless, there are ancient rocks about 3.8 billion years old, some slightly older. That give us clues as to what the early conditions were like. We've learned that the Earth has some features that are strangely familiar to us. There would have been oceans. Areas of continental land masses as well, much like present day Earth. We've also learned that things are very different as well, the atmosphere was very different. Low concentrations of oxygen, higher concentrations of carbon dioxide, and methane, which might have been important for climate at that time. We've learned that the conditions for life would have been quite challenging. For example, higher levels of ultraviolet radiation may have existed on the early Earth. And also, much higher levels of asteroid and comet bombardment that would have provided a challenge for early life trying to emerge in these early habitats. But nevertheless, these environments were now clement enough for the origin and emergence of life.

## 5 - 3 - 3.3 Evidence of early life - [6_55]

We've seen that the conditions on the early Earth became clement for life rather early on. But what is the evidencee for early life on Earth? The only direct evidence we have is from fossils and chemical signatures preserved in the geological record, and this evidence may be proof that life was established on the Earth by 3.5 billion years ago, possibly as early as 3.8 billion years ago. It's thought that the evidence does suggest life by 3.8 billion years, then it's likely to have arisen some time before that, because that early evidence is probably not preserved in the fossil record. This would suggest that life was present soon after the formation of the crust and oceans. And at the end of that period of late heavy bombardment, that period of intense asteroid and comet impacts on the surface of early Earth. 

Now, before we look at some of that evidence, it's worth reminding ourselves that the evidence is subject to intense scientific controversy. And to base, in fact, the evidence for early life on Earth is one of the most hotly debated areas of astrobiology. There are several lines of evidence that have been developed to suggest the presence of life on early Earth. 

One line of evidence of early life on Earth, is features called stromatolites. Stromatolites is laminated mounds which formed today in shallow marine water. They're built up by successive accumulation of sediments and microbes, and also rocks such as calcium carbonate. So as the microbes form, sediments collect on top of them and new layers of microbes form, and eventually you end up with these macroscopically visible mounds of microbial activity. 

The oldest Stromatolites have been found in 3.46 billion year old apex church silica rocks in Western Australia's Warraweena group. One of the reasons why they're so subject to controversy is because these mounds, as you can understand, look like features that can form by non-biological processes. For example, if sediments are laid down in shallow marine environments or rivers for example, they can also form these wavy textures that look at least, on the large scale, a little bit like stromatolites. 

So, further lines of evidence have been the search for microfossils. Fossils of individual microorganisms in these stromatolites or other types of rocks that can be evidence for life. This 3.46 billion year old stromatholites in Western Australia contain these filamentous structures which are thought to resemble modern cynobacteria. That composed of kerogen, which is the alteration product of heated and pressurized organic matter. And you can see some examples here of proported filaments in these apex charts. These micro fossils have also been subject to intense debate. Particularly because non-biological processes can also form filamentous structures. We don't really know the context of these ancient rocks, so this is another line of evidence, though, that astrobiologists seek in order to demonstrate early life on Earth, fossils of individual microorganisms. 

Carbon dating.But similar sorts of organisms taking out carbon through photosynthesis, depositing that carbon either in minerals or in organic matter, can also be used to find chemical signatures on early Earth. This so called isotope fractionation, this preferential uptake of light, lighter isotopes compared to heavier isotopes by life, is seen in carbonate rocks from as far back as 3.5 billion years ago and slightly more controversially earlier as well. 

So what is the problem with all of this evidence? These three lines of evidence, macroscopic features such as stromatolites, microfossils of individual microorganisms, and indirect evidence such as chemical signatures. Well, first of all, these are rocks very heavily metamorphosed. In other words, they've been altered by heat and pressure since their formation those many billions of years ago. This makes it much more difficult to interpret the evidence. The geological settings are usually uncertain while heavily disputed. We don't know exactly what the conditions were like in the regions where those early rocks were formed, and so were they really conducive for life? 

That's very important to determine to find out whether the fossils or chemical signatures that we see are really plausible evidence for life. And many of the features that we observed can be produced by nonbiological processes. The wavy textures in stromatolites can be produced in sediments without biology. Microfossils can be formed with similar types of structures by non biological processes. Filamenters, non biological structures that just look like biology. Chemical signatures, isotopic fractionation can also be caused by non biological processes. But scientist think that when this evidence is taken together, it does provide some compelling evidence for life on the early earth.

So what have we learned? We've learned that it's thought that life is established on the Earth by at least 3.5 billion years ago. The main evidence of this life comes from macroscopic features such as stromatolites, microfossils of creatures, and independent chemical alterations, such as the fractionation of carbon isotopes. Many people dispute this evidence on the grounds that similar features could be a result of non-biological processes. But it does show that the search for life on early Earth and the evidence for life on early Earth is an ongoing challenge of astrobiology. And this work will reveal whether the early life on Earth was established 3.5 billion years ago or earlier, and what the nature of this life might have been.

## 5 - 4 - 3.4 The Tree of Life - [9_12]

The Tree of Life is essentially a depiction of the relationship between organisms that evolutionary relationships and how they branch from one another. This is an example of the Tree of Life, and you can see it's made up of many groups of organisms. In fact, three groups or domains of organisms. On the left, you can see bacteria such as cyanobacteria, these are photosynthetic cyanobacteria that produce oxygen, and on the far right hand side, part of that Tree of Life includes animals, which includes, of course, ourselves, as well as, fungi and plants. How do we create this tree, and how do astrobiologists know the relationship between these different organisms? Well, Phylogenetics is the field of study that seeks to understand the evolutionary relationship between groups of organisms. It's based on comparisons of molecules within those organisms, such as the genetic storage information DNA or differences between their shapes. 

Here's a more detailed Tree of Life, and you can see that it starts with a common branch, and this is the common ancestor. The common ancestor of life that gave rise to all life on Earth today. And it's the job of astrobiologists to try and find out what that common ancestor was. 

The common ancestor gave rise to three main domains of life. These three domains are bacteria, which include many of the bacteria living in your soil, in your garden, also bacteria that cause disease. And then another domain called archaea. Archaea are made up of some of the organisms that live in the most extreme environments on the Earth, such as microbes that live in hot springs in the deep oceans or in volcanic springs, in volcanic areas. And then on the right of that diagram, you can see the eukaryotes, eukaryota. Eukaryotes include all multi-cellular life, such as animals, plants, some fungi, but also some single-celled organisms, as well including algae that live in the oceans. 

So how do we build this phylogenetic tree, this Tree of Life? Taxonomy, molecules inside organisms. Ribosomal RNA: responsible for translating DNA into proteins for reading the DNA code and turning it into proteins and in fact reads the code on RNA, RiboNucleicAcid and because this Ribosomal RNA so crucial to cell function, it hasn't changed much over billions of years. 

Organisms with similar rRNA have not changed much. rRna from two organisms that diverged would have a bigger split in RNA. Plate count anomaly: We don't know how to grow these microbes from the natural environment.

Microbes can do remarkable things. If I told you, for instance, that you could walk up to a person in the street, and just by touching them, your eye color would become the same as their eye color, you would think that's a ridiculous idea. Some sort of weird science fiction idea. But in fact, bacteria can do exactly that. In the environment they can take up DNA from other bacteria, and they can change their characteristics by absorbing this DNA. One process by which they do this, is called conjugation. Whereby they directly transfer DNA from one bacterium to another. This process makes the Tree of Life a little bit more complicated, because genetic information is not just transferred vertically from one generation to another through time, but the material can also be transferred horizontally, as we say, between species, at any particular point in time. And this means that the Tree of Life is less like a Tree of Life and more like a web of life, or a ring of life.

## 6 - 1 - 4.1 Life in Extreme Environments - Life Through Time - [18_07] 

Biological systems do only function in a continual, particular, physical and chemical extreme, and as we go to these circle of extremes, such as high temperature, low temperature, increased pressure, we find that the diversity of life generally in these environments tends to decrease. So it does seem that there are real extremes. Extremes beyond which life cannot go. Boundaries to the biosphere that are determined by physical and chemical extremities. 

The organisms that inhabit these extreme environments we call extremophiles. Literally, extreme lovers. They are mainly the prokaryotes. 

There are many hot environments on the Earth that harbor life, a good example is deep sea hydrothermal vents; places where reduced fluids containing sulfates, other toxic chemicals are spewing out from the crust of the Earth into the oceans. And these hydrothermal vents can be producing water, well over 100 degrees centigrade because of the high pressure in the deep oceans. The organisms that inhabit these hot environments, which also include volcanic hot springs in places like Yellowstone National Park, are called thermophiles, if they grow between 50 and 80 degrees, or if they grow at really high temperatures above 80 degrees, they're called hyperthermophiles. 

Now it's important to remember that these organisms aren't just capable of growing at these temperatures, they actually need to grow at high temperatures. If you take a hyperthermophile, for example, whose optimum growth temperature is above 80 degrees, and you bring it down to room temperature, it will generally die. These are microbes that actually have to be growing at these very high temperatures. 

A good example is methanopyrus kandleri. This is an archea that inhabits black smokers, deep ocean hydrothermal vents that are black, because they're producing sulfites, minerals that are produced in the oceans as these fluids gush out of these black smoker vents. The organism can grow up to temperatures of 110 degrees centigrade. Some of the challenges it faces like all thermophiles or hyperthermophiles are the breakdown of biomolecules. Those high temperatures impart energies to, the, to the microorganisms. They tend to cause the biomolecules to breakdown. They also have a problem with membrane fluidity. Very high temperatures, the energy causes the membranes to start shaking apart almost quite literally, and that fluidity in the membrane can cause problems for the integrity of the cell membrane. 

How does it deal with these challenges with living in these high temperature environments? Well two of the ways that deals with this is by evolving thermostable proteins and enzymes. Enzymes being biological catalysts involved in carrying out chemical reactions in the cell. These proteins have extra chemical bonds and other types of features that maintain their stability at these very high temperatures. It turns out that these proteins, or catalysts, these enzymes have, have commercial uses as well. For example, thermostable catalyst enzymes are used in biological washing powder. One of the reasons why your washing powder can work at high temperatures is because it contains proteins, enzymes form microorganisms that have been isolated from hydrothermal springs, volcanic hot springs. So you see we can use these thermostable enzymes and proteins for some very prosaic, but commercially useful applications. Other adaptations include changes to the cell membranes and composition to allow those membranes to maintain stability at high temperatures. 

Microorganisms have also been found in freezing environments, such as the depths of Antarctic ice sheets. This is an example of the deep lake in the Antarctic lake called Vostok. And just above that lake are microorganisms in the ice, in the accretion ice that forms above that deeply buried lake. In these sorts of ice sheets, microorganisms adapted to cold conditions can grow, and these are called psychrophiles, microorganisms that can grow at temperatures at less than 15 degrees centigrade. 

What are the challenges of living in a cold environment? Well, one challenge of course is membrane damage from ice. If ice crystals form in the cell, it can damage the membranes. Another problem is decreased membrane fluidity. In very cold temperatures, the lipids begin to solidify, a bit like if you put butter in your fridge, it begins to get a lot more solid. Those fatty acids, those lipids in the cell membranes, begin to solidify at very cold temperatures, and reduce the fluidity of the membrane that's necessary for the cell to export materials and import nutrients. Another obvious problem in freezing environments is the availability of liquid water, much of it is frozen up in ice. And so, organisms can have trouble getting hold of the liquid water that they need to carry out by chemical reactions. 

So how is it that these microbes can adapt to these extremely cold conditions? Well one way in which they adapt is by altering their membrane composition. A bit like the microbes living at high temperatures, they need to change the composition of the membranes to maintain their fluidity at low temperatures. One way in which they can do this is to incorporate more unsaturated fatty acids into their membranes. These unsaturated fatty acids have kinks in the membrane structure that pulls, pushes apart the membrane and makes it more fluid under cold conditions. Some of these microbes and other organisms also have antifreeze agents such as sugars. And these sugars prevent ice crystals from forming in the cells and reduce the chances of ice crystals forming and damaging the membranes, another way in which they can circumvent problems of growing at very low temperatures.

What about salty and dry environments? Well, microorganisms have been found that can inhabit very salty environments, such as microbes that live in the Dead Sea, and in deposits of salts around the Dead Sea. These are called halophiles. And these halophiles, literally salt lovers, can grow at salt concentrations between 15 and 37%. 

Microbes that live in deserts, also capable of tolerating very dry conditions, and these are called xerophilic microbes, you can find them in the deserts of the Atacama, the Sahara and other dry and desiccated environments of the earth. 
The challenges of living in salty and dry conditions are actually quite similar. One problem is osmotic pressure and water availability. In very high salt concentrations the salt has the tendency to pull water out of the cells by the process of osmosis. So cells have a problem in hanging onto their liquid water. And, of course, in dry deserts the problem is also the water tends to evaporate. Which causes problems for the maintenance of water in the cell, also osmotic effects in very dry conditions. Another challenge faced by mi-, microbes in both salty and dry environments is membrane integrity. Maintaining the integrity of the membranes and preventing them from falling apart under these very high salt concentrations that tend to disrupt biomolecules. And under very dry conditions, where the dry conditions also tend to cause disruption to the membranes lack of water. 

How do organisms adapt to these very extreme, salty, and dry conditions? Well two ways they can adapt are to control water loss from the cells. They can produce salts and other solutes within the cell that tend to hang onto the water, make it more difficult for it to dissipate from the cell. Another way in which they can deal with these extreme conditions is to go into a state of dormancy. When they're dormant, they're not active, but it allows them to wait around until conditions improve. There's a particular case for microbes living in deserts where they may want to go dormant and wait until liquid water becomes available and they can reproduce and grow again, and then go into a stage of dormancy when it dries up. 

Microbes have also been found that live at extremes of pH. For example the Rio Tinto River in Spain whose pH is down to 0.4 high concentration of protons in the water makes it very, very acidic. There are also places with very high pH, such as Mono Lake in the United States that has a pH up to 12.5 very alkaline or basic environments, that pose great challenges to microbes. The challenges that are faced to the organisms that live in these environments include the breakdown of their cellular components. For example, in acidic environments the very high proton concentration that's responsible for that acidity can disrupt biomolecules, causing them to become inoperative. These very challenging pH conditions are also a great challenge to metabolic processes. Processes for gaining energy and carrying out chemical reactions inside the cell. 

How the cells adapt to these extreme pHs? Well, one way they can adapt is to regulate the pH inside the cell in order to make it neutral. So for example, a microorganism living in very acidic environments will pump out protons from the cell and maintain the inside the cell at near neutral pH, and at neutral pH the biomolecules are much more stable and metabolic processes can proceed without disruption. In other words, these cells really don't like to be in an acidic environment. But they can change their internal conditions such they can survive and grow in acidic environments without the acid on the outside of the cell affecting cellular reactions inside the cell. This is a really ingenious way by which cells can survive and grow in acidic conditions and similar sorts of processes are also found in very alkaline environments. 

Organisms have also adapted to life under high pressure. In fact many of the habitats on earth for life are actually at high pressure. Two examples are the deep oceans, and the deep crust of the earth. In the deep oceans many of the trenches are at great depths, such as the Mariana Trench at 11 kilometers depth, and here pressures exceed a thousand atmospheres. The microbes that can live in these environments are called piezophiles microbes, literally pressure loving microbes. In fact at the current time we don't know what upper pressure limit for life is, but certainly they can survive at high pressures we found in these deep ocean trenches. Microbes are also found in the deep crust living in rocks kilometers underneath the surface of the Earth. 

The challenges of living at high pressure are the pressures cause the tight packing of molecules and a loss of fluidity in cell membranes. Pressure can also cause impaired cellular functions in activities. Particularly of enzymes that are necessary to carry out the catalytic functions of chemical reactions, inside the cell. How do cells, how do organisms adapt to live in these high-pressure environments in the deep oceans or in the crust? Well, one way in which they can adapt is by changing gene expression. They can produce, for example, molecules that enhance the uptake of nutrients and other elements that they need for growth across the cell membrane and thereby adapt to these challenging environments under high pressure. They can also change their membrane structure. For example, by introducing unsaturated fatty acids to increase membrane fluidity under high pressures. And you'll notice, that unsaturated fatty acids were also the way in which microbes can adapt to low temperatures. So some of the mechanisms that organisms use to adapt to one extreme are also used to adapt to other extremes. 

Can microorganisms survive in outer space? Space is characterized by extremes of radiation, freezing temperatures, dessication, and no oxygen. A few years ago, my own laboratory launched rocks into orbit, and these rocks were bolted onto the outside of the International Space Station. And we brought some back to earth a year and a half later to see whether anything had survived in space.

__And we found a single micro organism, a gloeocapsa, which is a type, cyanobacterium, a photosynthetic micro organism that was capable of surviving in the extreme conditions of space for a full year and a half.__ Of course it didn't grow in space, but it did survive. These types of experiments show how outer space is an environment that can even be survived by some microorganisms. Showing how hardy they are and how able they are to resist environmental extremes, if only for a short length of time. 

Many extremes that we find on the earth don't occur in isolation. I've talked about high and low temperatures, I've talked about salty environments, and highly acidic, and alkaline environments, but in fact in many natural environments there are frequently multiple extremes. Astrobiologists are very interested in polyextremophiles, extremophiles that can tolerate multiple extremes. 

Here's just one example of a rather famous organism called deinococcus radiodurans. This is a microbe that can tolerate high levels of radiation, it's also found in environments with cold temperatures, it's found in deserts that are very dry. Some of these organisms can tolerate vacuum conditions, and members of this group, the deinococci, are also found in very acidic environments as well. 

So we see how there are polyextremophiles that can survive multiple extremes, and by studying these microorganisms, we can get better understandings of how microbes tolerate the boundaries of extremes, to find the boundaries of the earth biosphere. Why is this of any interest to astrobiologists? Well, there are really two reasons why we're interested in studying microbes at extremes, and particularly those microbes that can tolerate multiple extremes. First of all, of course, it tells us about the boundaries of the earth's biosphere. What are the limits of life on earth? When do we go beyond those limits? And how might environmental changes throughout the history of the Earth, even if environmental changes cause by humans, affect life on earth, and those microorganisms that inhabit the outer boundaries of the biosphere? But the other reasons for being interested in studying life in extreme environments is because it might give us better ideas about the habitability of other worlds such as Mars, Europa, and Enceladus and Titan and other planetary bodies of interest to astrobiologists. Once we know the physical conditions on those planetary bodies, we want to be able to assess whether they are within the boundaries for life. Whether life might be able to persist on those planetary bodies. The only way in which we can do that is by studying microorganisms of life in general in extreme environments, and seeing whether extremes we observe on other planetary bodies are extremes that can be tolerated by life forms that we know on the Earth. So the study of life in extreme environments is essential for assessing habitability, the ability other planetary bodies to harbor life. 

## 6 - 2 - 4.2 The Rise of Multicellularity - Life Through Time - [10_03] 

For about three billion years, all life on Earth was microbial, unicellular. Single-celled organisms forming the stromatolites that we saw earlier. All these microbial mats, just collections of undifferentiated microorganisms simply reproducing and producing the same cells as they grow in particular environments. The controversial evidence for these very early life forms is in the fossil record, and we've talked about that already. Also chemical signatures. But all of this evidence, and it gets better as time goes on through the history of life on Earth, gives us this knowledge that for about 3 billion years, life just continued being unicellular. 

And then something, remarkable happened. A complete change. Between about 585 million years ago and 542 million years ago, the Ediacaran Fauna, which are fossils in the rock record, that suggest the first multicellular organisms. And these fossils are very enigmatic. We don't really understand them. Some of them have strange frome shapes. Some of them have strange tubular shapes. They seem to be experiments. Experiments in early body plans as cells began to differentiate, become more specialized, and form larger complex organisms that would ultimately lead to the multicellular life that we know on Earth today. 

They were first discovered in Australia. This is an artist's impression of these fauna, as its been found in the rock record. And what they might have looked like in these early environments over 500 million years ago. And you can see these strange three-dimensional shapes that suggest these early experiments in different body plans, as life began to emerge from its unicellular state. To complex multicellular organisms with specialized body plans and cells forming specialized parts of the different organisms. 

So an obvious question for astrobiologists is, how did this multicellularity arise and why did it arise? Well, it still remains controversial, and in fact the rise of multicellularity is one of the great puzzles in astrobiology, and one of the great puzzles for biologists. 

Here are some possible examples of ways in which this might have occurred. There may have been some sort of genetic change. At some point in the early history of life, in the early history of those multicellular organisms, the genetic material of DNA DNA changed. And there was mutation that led to specialization of cells. So what were unicellular, non-specialized cells, the genetic information changed. They mutated, and some cells became specialized to do one function. And some cells carried on doing another function, but they remained in communication. So they remained in a complete organism. Well, why would this occur in the first place? We don't really understand. Maybe it was something to do with the complexity of genetic material. 

Another possibility is not just changes internally in the genetic information but also changes in the environment. For example, the rise of oxygen might have been important for multicellular life. Why would that have been the case? Well, once we have oxygen in the atmosphere, we can do aerobic respiration. That's the way in which you and I make energy. We essentially burn organic carbon, for example, in our sandwiches, using oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere. And that releases a tremendous amount of energy. Energy that can be used to run, to jump, and even to power the human brain. And that's the same for other multicellular organisms, as well. Without oxygen, the sorts of metabolisms, the sorts of ways in which life can get energy, are much less energy-efficient than aerobic respiration. So, the rise in oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere might have been one of the triggers that allowed for complex organisms, multicellular organisms to start to arise on the surface of the Earth. 

Of course it's possible that none of these things was mutually exclusive. It might be that a number of these factors occurred at the same time. The rise in oxygen might have allowed for aerobic respiration, complex multicellular organisms. And that might also have helped trigger genetic changes within organisms that allowed them to exploit these new potentials. So perhaps a number of things contributed to the rise of multicellular life that were interconnected. 

But once multicellular life did arise, why was it selected for? Why did it persist? Well, there are a number of possibilities. First of all, once organisms became multicellular, they became larger. And some sort of arms race may have occurred between organisms. Larger organisms would have evolved to eat smaller organisms. Then there would have been a selection pressure, a Darwinian selection pressure for organisms to get larger, to eat those new predators, and so on and so forth. An arms race becomes established as organisms become larger and more complex to deal with the new biological environment in which they're living. 

Cellular specialization can lead to increases in efficiency. Some cells being specialized for locomotion, other cells being specialized to generate energy, and so on and so forth. This specialization, this division of labor in the way in which cells operated might itself have increased the survival potential of life in particular environments. Multicellular organisms may also have been able to develop better physical protection from the environment. You can think about things like shells and skeletons, that allow life to to move around, to protect itself from physical extremes, to escape physical extremes. So multicellularity would have led to would have led to advantages in living in the natural environment. And finally, computational advantages. As you get more complex organisms, as they become multicellular, you can get more complex behaviors. You can appreciate the behavior of a dog is more complex than the behavior of a microbe, for instance. So multicellular organisms can do things like run away from physical stresses, run away from dangers in the environment. These computational advantages that allow life to live in a complex world, and increases its, increase its chances of survival. 

We know that at about 542 million years ago, this complex multicellular life was well established. How do we know that? Well, as life became more complex, as multicellular life began to diversify, some of these creatures began to produce skeletons, bones, and also shells. And bones and shells are much more easy to preserve in the rock record than soft tissues. So, complex multicellular life with skeletons and shells is well preserved in the rock record. And begins to give us the first unequivocal evidence that complex multicellular life had begun to emerge on the Earth at about 540 million years ago. 

And this period, where we start to start to see these multicellular organisms rapidly increasing in the rock record, is called the Cambrian Explosion. Literally because of an explosion, a vast increase in the number of preserved multicellular organisms in that rock record. 

It would be very easy to think of the history of life as a very simplified thing. We start off with unicellular organisms, and then the emergence of multicellular life, and a gradual increase in the complexity and diversity of that multicellular life. But that wouldn't be true. In fact, we look in the rock record, we can see that there have been mass extinctions. Periods in Earth history where large percentages of these organisms have literally been laid waste. In the rock record, we notice five mass extinctions. And some people even think our current time, because of the scale of human impact on the biosphere, is a sixth mass extinction. 

During these periods of mass extinction, diversity is reduced but then picks up again afterwards. In fact, interestingly after many of these mass extinctions, diversity has increased after these extinction events. What has caused them? We'll, they're very controversial. For example the cretaceous paleogene extinction 65 million years ago, when the dinosaurs went extinct, is thought to have been caused by an asteroid or comet impact on the surface of the Earth. That asteroid or comet impact would have lofted dust into the atmosphere, shutting out sunlight. When the sunlight shut down, it would have prevented photosynthesis. Plant life would have died off removing the source of food for many organisms, multicellular organisms on the surface of the Earth. And as a result, food webs would have crashed, and many organisms would have gone extinct. 

Other mass extinctions might have been caused by massive volcanoes, changes in the chemistry of the oceans, changes in the chemistry of the atmosphere. So there are many mechanisms by which mass extinctions might have been caused. And it's one of the go-, the great interesting areas of astrobiology is to try and unravel the causes of these mass extinctions by looking at the geological, geochemical, and environmental changes that might have occurred. That are recorded in the rock record, from which we might be able to ascertain what caused these mass extinctions in the past. 

But we should also remember that mass extinctions have created opportunities for life. The death of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago undoubtedly opened the way for the rise of mammals. And eventually to us, and eventually the rise of human intelligence, and the intelligence on the surface of the Earth. So mass extinctions can change the course of biology. And also create new potentials and new possibilities for the emergence of new new forms of life. 

## 6 - 3 - 4.3 The Great Oxidation Event - Life Through Time - [12_31]

There have been many changes in the environment of the Earth through time. But there's probably little doubt in saying that one of the most important changes was the rise in oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere. The oxidation of the atmosphere. __Why is this important? Well, oxygen makes possible aerobic respiration.__ Oxygen can be used to essentially burn organic carbon, in a controlled way, of course, in organisms and release great quantities of energy, which can probably allow for the complexities of multicellular organisms. So the rise in oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere had profound implications, as we'll see, for life on our planet. 

We know from the rock record, and we'll see how this is the case in a while, that the oxygen on the early Earth, the very early Earth, at least 4 billion years ago, was much lower than it is today. Much less than .1% of present atmospheric levels. 

And this raises several questions of interest to astrobiologists. When did oxygen become abundant? What was the cause of this rise? How do we track the rise of oxygen in the atmosphere? How do we figure out what that, what level of oxygen was in the early Earth atmosphere? And how did this change affect life on Earth? What were the consequences for the biosphere? 

Well, this graph just shows you how oxygen has changed over time. And we can use things called proxies. These are geochemical indicators in the rock record that tell us something about the concentrations of oxygen. Minerals, for example, are rocks that behave in particular ways when they're subjected to certain atmospheric concentrations of oxygen. And the way in which those minerals behave can tell us what the levels of oxygen might have been in the atmosphere. And we'll come back to that in a moment. But it's important to recognize three essential, major periods of oxygen throughout Earth history. 

First of all, a very early period, from the formation of the earth through to about 2.4 billion years ago, when oxygen levels were very low. Much less than .1% of oxygen in the earth's atmosphere. And then about 2.45 billion years ago, a sudden and abrupt, at least on geological time scales, rise in atmosphere oxygen to about 10% of the present atmosphereic level. And then, roughly, about 500, million years ago, 600 million years ago, another rise in atmospheric oxygen up to, present day levels, around 20% of the, Earth's atmosphere, although it's varied over the last few hundred million years. 

But the question we want to address here is, what caused this first rise in oxygen? What would cause oxygen in a planetary atmosphere to rise, very abruptly? Well, first of all, we might question, how is oxygen produced? Where does it come from to rise in the atmosphere in the first place? 

Well, the main source of oxygen in the atmosphere is photosynthesis. That's the main biological source of this gas. Photosynthetic microorganisms such as cyanobacteria produce oxygen in photosynthesis. This is a waste product of oxygen. And that can build up in the atmosphere and give rise to high concentrations of oxygen, in the atmospheric composition. But oxygen is also taken out of the atmosphere. There's a balance between oxygen being produced and oxygen being removed. 

How can oxygen be removed from an atmosphere? Well, two mechanisms by which this can occur. Firstly, oxygen binding with dead organic material, dead organisms in other words, and reacting with that organic material and being removed from the atmosphere. So when an organism dies, it's essentially a lump of organic carbon. And that organic carbon can react, can oxidize at the presence of oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere and consume atmospheric oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere. And you'll understand, of course, that that means that, if we bury a dead organism before it gets a chance to react with oxygen in the atmosphere, we can actually get a net production of oxygen in the atmosphere. We can actually increase the oxygen in the atmosphere by burying organisms in sediments or in sands before that organic material can have a chance to react with the oxygen and remove it from the atmosphere. 

Another way in which oxygen can be removed form the atmosphere is by reacting with reducing compounds, things like hydrogen sulfide or hydrogen. Compounds that will tend to react with oxygen and chemical reactions and thereby remove it from the atmosphere. And a source of these reducing compounds is volcanic eruptions. 

So, if we want to build up oxygen in the earth's atmosphere, we have to do one of two things. Either we have to take less of it out of the atmosphere, so that there is a net buildup of oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere. Or we have to produce more by photosynthesis. We think that photosynthesis evolved a long time before the rise in oxygen in the earth's atmosphere. And, as a result, it doesn't seem like that that's a good reason for the rise in oxygen in the earth's atmosphere, that photosynthesis suddenly became more active and produced more oxygen. 

One possibility is a sudden reduction in the gases being produced by volcanism, that would mean less oxygen was being removed, from the atmosphere. Another possibility is that there was an increase in the burial of dead organisms. If we increase the burial of dead organisms, buried more of them more quickly, they'll have less of a chance to react with the oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere. And so oxygen will tend to stick around in the atmosphere and not be removed from the atmosphere in those dead organisms. We also may have had a switch between two stable states. Maybe the atmospheric dynamics of the Earth was such that all of these factors came into play. At some particular point in the Earth's history, about 2.45 billion years ago, the rise in oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere could have been a combination of things. Increased burial of, of organisms that prevented them from mopping up oxygen. Perhaps a reduction in the amount of gases being produced, from volcanism and other sources that could have mopped up oxygen. Maybe some of these, not others, maybe a combination of these events. It remains, one of the great enigmas of astrobiology to try and fathom out why oxygen rose so quickly. 
As the surface of the Earth switched from an anaerobic environment, essentially an oxygen-free environment, to a more oxic environment, where there was oxygen, that would've changed the oxidation states of elements, like iron and other sorts of elements important in the biosphere. And that would have caused radical shifts in the geochemical cycling of elements through the earth's crust with knockout effects on the biosphere. So changes from an oxygen-free environment to an oxygen-containing environment would have had a profound implications for how elements behaved in the Earth's crust. 

For life, it was a double-edged sword. On the one hand, the rise of oxygen would have meant that those organisms that were used to living on a planet with very low levels of oxygen would have been forced into particular environments where there were still essentially oxygen-free conditions. For example, in the deep oceans, perhaps underground, where conditions were still essentially oxygen-free. It would've been a very bad time from the point of view of anaerobic organisms, organisms that prefer oxygen-free environments, to have, found habitats. But, on the other hand, the rise of oxygen, as I've already said, would have allowed for aerobic respiration. __Aerobic respiration is between about 15, 20 times more efficient than many anaerobic metabolisms, many anaerobic ways of making energy.__ 

And that rise in oxygen would have allowed for aerobic respiration and possibly the rise of multicellular organisms, eventually giving rise to intelligence. So, the rise in oxygen may have been, beneficial, perhaps even essential, ultimately, for the rise of intelligence on our planet. So, we can think of the rise in oxygen as a double-edged sword. 

How do we re-construct these past oxygen, environments on the early Earth? How do we know that oxygen rose in this way? One way is to look at the phylogenetic tree. 

To look at the relationship of organisms and to try and see when the first oxygen-requiring organisms appeared in the tree of life and how that matches up with the geological record. So the phylogenetic tree that we've already looked at in this course is a source of information about the development of organisms, particularly microorganisms on our planet that can tell us something about how environments might have changed through time. And how that transition from organisms that were predominantly living in oxygen free environments to organisms that needed oxygen would have occured and when that transition would have occurred. 

We can also learn something about past oxygen environments from minerals, proxies as we call them, that tell us something about the oxygen environments in which they were formed. For example, pyrite, which is iron sulfide, tends to be formed at oxygen concentrations less than 0.1% of the present atmospheric level, 21%. Urananite, which is a uranium oxide, which tends to be formed at oxygen concentrations much less than 0.01% of present atmospheric levels. siderite, which is iron carbonate, which is really only formed at oxygen concentrations much less than 0.001%.

Geochemical proxies that we can look for in the rock record and that tell scientists about the oxygen concentrations that would have prevailed. At least in the environments in which those minerals were being formed. But possibly also on the global scale as well. We can also look at elements that are very sensitive to changes in oxygen, particularly in the way in which they dissolve in water. 

For example, take iron, a very common element. When iron is in a reduced state, Fe2 plus, reduced iron, it's very soluble in water. But it tends to be in that state much more readily when there's very little oxygen around. When there's lots of oxygen around, that iron will oxidize and essentially form rust, the rust that you and I are familiar with. And rust is not very soluble. If you scrape rust off a, off a rusted, metal gate and you try and mix it with water, it won't really dissolve, it'll just float around in the water as a solid. It's not very soluble. But reduced iron formed when there's very low concentrations of oxygen, it's very soluble. If we look at the changes in these elements throughout history, we can learn something about whether there was high or low oxygen in the atmosphere through time. 

A good example of this is banded iron formations. And these are layers of iron-rich compounds that were laid down in the rock record before 2.4 billion years ago. Where did these banded iron formations come from? Well, what we think happened is that, before 2.4 billion years ago, there was very little oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere. And, as a result, a lot of the iron in the oceans was dissolved. It was solubilized. It was mixed with the water in the form of reduced iron, a very soluble form of iron. And, every now and again, there may have been some oxidation event. For example, oxygenic photosynthesizers might have produced localized oxygen that oxidized that iron and turned it into rust. It's possible that other types of microbes, microbes that like to eat iron as a source of energy and produce oxidized iron, rust, as a waste product of that feeding, could also have oxidized that iron. When that iron became oxidized, it became insoluble, it no longer dissolved in the oceans and it settled down into the bottom of the oceans and formed these rich iron sediments. And these banded iron formations, these bands of iron, suggests that the iron in the ocean, which was generally dissolved, solubilized in the water, every now and again, became oxidized to rust and settled out and formed these great thick layers of red iron oxides. T

he disappearance of these iron, iron formations, these banded iron formations at about 2.4 billions years ago, suggests that the atmosphere had become completely oxidized. There was no longer large quantities of dissolved iron in the oceans that, every now and again, would become oxydized and fall out of the oceans. Now the iron was constantly oxidized and so no longer produced these rich layers of iron-containing rocks, that were formed when there was very little oxygen in the atmosphere. This is just an example of how we can look in the rock record and, by studying elements that changed the way in which they can be soluble in water depending upon the levels of oxygen, the way in which these changes occur can tell us something about past oxygen levels in the atmosphere. And that's how astrobiologists learn about how oxygen has changed throughout the history of life on Earth. 