# Cooperation, Competition, and Comparisons

## The Thin Line Between Cooperation and Competition

 - The line between cooperation and competition is surprisingly thin.
- So what I want to think about is how we navigate this tension. What pushes us from cooperation to competition, or from competition to cooperation? In this Thanksgiving example, we have the cooperative meal and then this competitive dash for these holiday sales. But I think a more dramatic example of the shift from competition to cooperation is represented in the relationship between the United States and Japan.
- As we all know, the conflict in World War II was intense.
- Here this is a photo of fire bombing in 1941. We had intense conflict, United States fire bombed 67 Japanese cities in addition to dropping two atomic bombs. Culminating in 1945 and the Japanese ultimately surrendered. So the conflict between the United States and Japan could not have been more intense.
- And yet immediately after that conflict, there was a pivot to cooperation.
- **And Joe McArthur, when they took over in Japan, shifted immediately to cooperation. Made it illegal for any American to strike a Japanese person. Even made it illegal for Americans to eat Japanese food because there was such a food shortage on Japan, Americans who were there could only eat the American rations.**
- Now, we move forward, we ended up cooperating, rebuilding factories. And here you see these cooperation through the 1950s, culminating in this declaration of cooperation signed in 1960. And today, you'd be hard press to find citizens that are more pro U.S. than those in Japan.
- So we see this remarkable shift from competition to cooperation.
- Now, this happens not just on the global stage, not just in terms of shopping malls, but it happens in our most intimate relationships we think about parenting. **Parenting, you can't be more intimately cooperative with someone other than your partner. And think about the cooperation that goes into raising a child. And yet even with raising a child, there's competition. There's competition with your spouse of who's going to sleep, who's going to change or feed the baby. And we have competition even within our most intensely cooperative relationships. So the idea is that we shift between cooperation and competition, and we often balance cooperation and competition even in our most intense relationships.**
- Now, think about siblings. So with siblings, we often think about sibling love.
- But at the same time we think about sibling rivalry. Now, here's one example of sibling love. We think about with humans but it turns out the ground squirrel teaches us something really important about siblings. Ground squirrels are actually incredibly altruistic. When a predator is nearby, say a bird overhead or another large animal, ground squirrels will screech to warn others to get out of the way. Now by screeching they're drawing attention to themselves. It puts them at risk, it makes them vulnerable to some attack.
- As scholars have looked at the volume with which ground squirrels screech, it turns out they screech loudest when a predator is near their sibling. So we see sibling love, even among ground squirrels. And so we have this incredible relationship with our siblings and yet sibling rivalry can be incredibly intense. These are our closest friends and also some as our closest rivals as we compete for things like parental attention and investment. For twins it starts particularly early, even in the womb, twins start competing for resources.
- Now, more generally, we think about collaborating at work. We need to collaborate with our colleagues at work to accomplish joint goals. But then we're also competing for things like recognition, promotion and raises. So both at home and at work we're both cooperating and competing, and we need to figure out how to manage this tension and navigate this balance.
- So, the idea is that we're competing and cooperating all the time. And often, within the same relationships at the same time.

## The Three Principles of Cooperation and Competition

- **The first principle is scarcity.**
- We think about scarcity and this is exactly what happened in Thanksgiving. So Thanksgiving, with this feast, we have abundant resources. And we are celebrating a cooperative event. But then we go out into the marketplace and these scarce deals cause us to compete fiercely for these scarce resources of low priced TVs and other things. Now we see scarcity not just in humans shifting us between cooperation and competition. But in size of animals we see the same thing.
- A study of zebras found that the zebras actually behave differently as a function of how much water was available in their environment. When water was abundant, they formed one type of collectives and when water was scare, they formed a very different kind of collective. There's their social relationships shifted dramatically as a function of how scare this very precious water resource was.
- **Now the second principle is how social we are. We're inherently social beings. We crave companionship. In fact, one of the worst forms of punishment in solitary confinement.**
- After just a few days the human mind begins to decay in solitary confinement, people experience hallucinations, spasms of anger, malaise and apathy. We both crave human contact after being in solitary confinement, and we're also unfit for it. The human mind needs to be socially connected.
- **The third principle is dynamic instability. The world around us is stochastic. It changes. It's unstable. Just like the stock market, things are shifting all around us and we need to quickly change and pivot between cooperation and competition. So this unstable and dynamic world, as we learn new information, we try to gather new information, it causes us to both cooperate and compete.**
- And it's really the interplay between these three principles. Scarcity, the sociability and dynamic instability that causes to pivot back and forth between cooperation and competition. And sometimes we're engaging in both at the same time and we need to find our balance as both competitors and collaborators.

## The Mechanics of Comparisons

- What we're going to talk about next are comparisons. And on a break down the mechanics, of the comparisons that we make. And argue that they're very fundamental force in our lives. They help us understand some interesting puzzles. Here's one. Why are twins separated at birth often so similar? Take Tom Patterson and Steve Tazumi, they were twins separated at birth.
The two grew up in completely different households, different religions, different schooling and yet, when they got together, they were shocked at how similar they were.
One owned a body building gym, and was a complete fitness addict. The other owned a body building gym, and was totally into fitness. And when they got together they said, we connected from the first time we met, because we're so much alike. I want to think about that question. That is, why might twins separated at birth end up being so similar?
Here's a second puzzle.
Why do expectant fathers gain weight, when there's no biological reason for them to gain weight?

- By understanding the comparison process, we could gain insight into these puzzles.
- **Now, here's the first key idea. The comparisons we make help us make sense of our world. They help us understand if we went on a good vacation, if we're making a good salary, if I need to redo my kitchen, if I need to buy a new car. It's comparisons that help us make meaning out of all these, different outcomes we have in our lives.**
- Now, here's some other key ideas about comparisons. First, they're inevitable. All of us make comparisons. Now, some of us are drawn to check Facebook more often than others, but all of us are drawn to make these comparisons, and they help us make sense a things, but they also drive us to feel better, or motivate us or to feel worse. Now, part of how they work are, we make comparisons there are sometimes going up. People who have done better than we have. People who have nicer apartments, nicer cars. Or comparisons where we look down. People who might not have accomplished as much as us.
- **Upward comparisons can inspire us, they can also make us miserable. Downward comparisons can make us feel content and satisfied, but are less motivating.**
- Another key idea about comparisons, is that we can make them within ourselves and with other people. So often, the comparisons we make are to somebody else, so it could be our neighbor, it could be our brother-in-law, it could be the person in the cubicle next to me.
- But, we can also make internal comparisons, where I think about how I did before or the comparison of what I could have done. So, these internal comparisons relative to me, or comparisons relative to others.
- When a comparison's most intense. It turns out there are three dimensions that make comparisons more or less impactful.
- **The first to mention is similarity. By similarity we're thinking about things like siblings, and the closest sibling is a twin, where we have very intense similarity. So, the more similar we are, the more these comparisons matter. And it's not just siblings. It could be very close friends. People that we find ourselves similar to, in the same cohort. We might have started in the same class together. Similarity is really important.**
  - And in fact, the similarity helps us understand things like the spread of obesity. So, one reason why expectant fathers gain weight, it was not biological for them to do so. It's that they are comparing themselves to people right to them. And so the husbands and wives, are comparing themselves and their comparison impacts motivation. We can see from these graphs here, first there's some kinds of comparisons that matter most. Those are comparisons where it's actually both of us see ourselves as friends. So, those are going to be the strongest friendships, and where we're comparing ourselves to the same sex others. So, the more similar the person, the more impactful that comparison is. And in fact, we see this network that helps explain the spread of obesity, through friendships. Through the network, the comparisons we're making, we find ourselves motivated. So, when I see everybody else around me reaching for a doughnuts, I figure well, I don't think I should eat more doughnuts. But if everybody else is doing it, or if that sort of look looks fine to me. Everybody else in my comparison said it is influencing my own comparison of what is or isn't acceptable.
- Now for similar reasons, reunions can be quite stressful, because at reunions we're going back, and we're engaging in intense comparisons. So, it could be a high school reunion, it could be a family reunion. There, we're going to see people with whom we're likely to make comparisons. These are people from our from our same cohort. Or the same family structure. They started perhaps in similar circumstances, and now we're going to make these comparisons because of similarity.
- **The second dimension is proximity. So if you think of the most intense rivalries, like the Tar Hills and Blue Devils, UNC and Duke. Here, we're looking at rivalries, these are two schools separated by just nine miles, with very strong basketball teams. And that intense rivalries in part fueled by proximity.**
- Now, proximities also not just between universities ,but things like neighbors. So, here in this quote from Borat, we see is intense neighbor comparison. Where we're thinking about going back and forth, who has what in their homes untill he says great success, when he finally gets something that his neighbor can't have.
- **So here we have the first two similarity and proximity, the third thing that makes comparisons particularly intense is self relevance. By self relevance, I mean something like we care about, so if I really care about advancing my career, who gets that promotion is self-relevant. When my neighbor wins a baking competition, and I don't consider myself much of a baker, that lacks self-relevance and as a result, that comparison isn't very intense.**
- So, the most intense comparisons are people who are similar like brothers, cubicle mates, neighbors, my brother in law. Proximity people who are very close to me physically. And then soft relevance, a domain that I really care about. So, if I'm a musician, I care about winning that musical competition. But if I'm not then I care less.
- Social comparisons have these characteristics, and they influence a few different behaviours. We've already eluded to some of those so far, the first is how we collaborate with other people. So, as we learn information, it can change the way we collaborate or compete with others. So we might find that somebody else is making more money than we are, that might make collaboration harder. Or we might find that somebody else, has a very different back than we do and that might make collaboration easier. And mitigate the intense comparisons we might otherwise have made. So, comparisons can make us collaborate or compete.
- But they can also lead us to retreat altogether. So, sometimes comparisons can be so unpleasant, we want to exit the situation because we find it so invidious.

## The Misery of Upward Comparisons

- That is, until they see a neighbor, a monkey in a cage next to them, getting something better than a cucumber, like a grape. And here I'll show you a video from one of his studies, where two capuchin monkeys, side by side, are handing over stones, one's getting a cucumber, the other one's getting a grape. We can see what happens.
- Throwing the cucumber and not wanting to participate, where the stone now no longer becomes worth a cucumber. And it's all relative, and it's because some other capuchin monkey is getting a better deal, that this original deal that seemed fine is no longer okay.
- **And it's not just monkeys. I want to argue that we're hard wired to make this comparisons, and these comparisons really influence us.**

### At work

- So if you take us to Scott Crabtree, here is somebody who was working for a tech firm. Was perfectly happy with his job, felt motivated, inspired by it. Until they had to go out to the market, they recruited a new hotshot employee. This new employee came in at almost the same salary that he taking years to develop and all of a sudden his work became irritating and he got upset about it. He was so upset, he actually end up quitting. He joined a different firm where he became the Chief Happiness Officer.
- So just as he capuchin monkeys, Scott Crabtree wouldn't realize that somebody else is getting a deal that seemed better than his, a younger person with almost the same salary, he ended up quitting and leaving and trying to find happiness somewhere else.
- Now, it's not just individuals. It happens to groups too. And here, American Airlines years ago were facing very tough financial straits. They were on the verge of bankruptcy. They negotiated assiduously with their unions, the pilots' union, the flight attendants, the baggage handlers, the mechanics and they got them to agree to incredible concessions. So unions together, they agree to $1.8 billion concessions. Now, at the same time, the executives at American airlines, they could have left American Airlines for other more stable companies, and they try to retain those executives. And to retain them they were giving them retention bonuses. Now here's the problem. They had offered them $41 million in retention bonuses.
- There's an SEC filing deadline and this information became public. So just after the unions had agreed to steep concessions, they learned that the executive team was going to end up with these retention bonuses.
- Well you can imagine, just like the capuchin monkeys, they became furious. So the concessions were acceptable until they found out that somebody else was getting paid a bonus. And the first thing they did is they fired their negotiator, they withdrew these concessions, had to go back to the drawing table to try to and negotiate.
- So, here's the question. Is a stone worth a cucumber?
- Are $1.8 billion in concessions reasonable? Am I getting paid a fair salary? And for all of these questions, the answer is, well, it depends, and we have comparisons that inform our answers.

### Artificial Twins

- So here this comparison is driving him crazy. Now, for similar reasons, we can think about twins. Now, one idea is you think, well, what's an artificial twin? An artificial twin is adopting someone that's similar, in age, to a biological son or daughter. Now, what'd be great about it is you have a built in playmate. There's an economies of scale, there's one carpool, you have one school, you can have one soccer drop off, it could be great. And yet, adoption experts say in a majority leader argues against the corrosive social comparisons that are created by artificial twins. That is by doing this, there's always going to be some twin, one of those twins, that's going to be out ahead of the other. There could be developmental differences and that constant comparison is going to make artificial twins really toxic.
- And so many agencies not only counsel but almost prohibit the adoption of artificial twins.
- Now, let's think about something else, let's think about doing better but feeling worse. How could that happen? Now again, it's going to be comparisons that help us unlock this puzzle.
- Let's think about Abel Kiviat, he was a silver medalist in 1912. In this Olympics, it's the first Olympics where they used a photo finish to determine who had won and by tenth of a second, he came in second. This was 1912. Now here's an interview he gave, in 1990, almost 80 years later. He talks about waking up thinking what the heck happened. He's languishing and the intense counterfactual of had he only run just a bit faster, he could've come in first.
- **It turns out that this intense feeling is not just unique to Abel. It's actually incredibly prominent where you see silver medalists chronically express dissatisfaction. A couple of academic articles have studied this, even terming this the silver medal face, where you have silver medalists who look downright distraught, really unhappy. And in fact by contrast you see bronze medalist who end up looking much happier than their silver medal counterparts.**
- So in this study almost all the gold medalist are smiling. But the bronze medalist are smiling a little bit less often. But in these studies, none of the silver medalist were smiling. If you think about these comparisons, the silver medalists, like Abel, are comparing themselves to the gold medalists that would've been a lot better. When you compare silver to bronze, they're kind of similar. But the bronze medalists, if silver is kind of close, that's not a very big upward comparison. But to 4th place, that's a chasm. There you're just an athlete, not a medalist and so the bronze medalist are delighted to have escaped that other fate.
- So, we see this doing better but feeling worse phenomenon in these medalists where silver medalists are often downright miserable.
- So, here we can think about this important lesson where comparisons can drive us, they can motivate us, but they can also make us perfectly miserable.

## Comparisons and Motivation

- It turns out it wasn't unique to this Duke-Michigan game. It turns out that if we looked at 18,000 NBA games, which Jonah Berger and Devin Pope did. They analyzed over 18,000 games, and they found a discontinuity where teams down by one point at the half were actually more likely to win. That is, in general, if one team's winning by a lot they're likely to win the game. So if you're ahead at the halftime, it generally helps predict who wins at the end of the game, except for if you're down by just a very little bit. Because when you're down by a very little bit, you're motivated by that comparison. And that motivates you, it increases effort. And people down by one at the halftime are actually more likely to win.
- Now, here we find that it's not just in sports. We can see this on the global stage, we think about the space race. Now if we were to go back in the space race we were to go back to 1950s. And in July, 1955, Eisenhower came out and said the United States will launch a science satellite to orbit Earth. That was his goal. He came out with that goal, and then was surprised when the US wasn't the first to launch a satellite, but the Russians were. We're in a space race with the Russians, and Russians launched Sputnik. And that Sputnik crisis has actually carried forward for decades, and we still invoke Sputnik to think about how we're falling behind and need to catch up. So here the US felt like they were behind and needed to catch up, and it motivated an incredible government action. So we had the National Defense Education Act. It led to scholarships, NARPA, NASA. We invested an incredible amount of money. The NASA budget alone took off. You see this budget growing incredibly, where at the time it was $6 billion. Today that would be $32 billion. So in 1960s we were spending a huge fraction of the national budget just on the space budget. If I were to ask what's the right amount to spend, it's hard to tell, but we knew that we were falling behind. And in that comparison, by comparison we were down relative to the Russians. They had launched Sputnik to orbit Earth before we did. And that motivated us because of that comparison. And it challenged us and motivates to accomplish great things. So we can think about if we were to recast this one small step for man, but it turns out to be one giant leap, not just for mankind but for America over the Soviets.
- Now social comparisons matter in a lot of cases, but no more so than in rivals. Rivals are special comparisons. Rivals are people with whom we have an extra psychological rivalry. We get a benefit from beating a rival in a way we don't with anybody else. Analyzed lots and lots of rivalries, and found that runners run faster when they have a rival in that race.
- So if you're racing against a close rival, you're likely to get a better time.
- It's not just runners. We find this in many different contexts. And here, for those of you that are big basketball fans, you'll remember the Larry Bird, Magic Johnson rivalry. And here, Larry Bird said the first thing I would do every morning was look at the box scores to see what Magic did. I didn't care about anything else. This is intense focus, intense focus on a rival.
- Both of them have won national championships, and to win a national championship you need a lot of things. You need good coaching, you need great players, you also need a lot of motivation. And what you see is here in 92, Duke wins, 93 UNC wins. Now that'd be remarkable if it happened once, but then you see the reverse happening in 2009, UNC wins and then Duke wins the following year. So here we can see rivals motivated, highly motivated by each other. Now it happens in all kinds of relationships, if you look at sisters, a study of sisters where one's in the labor force and one stays at home.
- One of the things that drives whether or not one of these women works outside the home is how much their husbands make.
- **And we find that if the husband earns less than the sister's husband that household income seems like it's not enough. And that woman is motivated to work outside the home. Interestingly, it's not that absolute amount of money that matters. It's the relative amount that really matters.**
- So here's the broad idea, that is comparisons can motivate us and in many cases it can be very constructive motivation. But when you think about it in check, that is, not all that motivation is good, and we'll think about some of that next.

## Comparisons and Cheating

### Tanya Harding

- It turns out that comparisons can not only make us miserable, they can also motivate us to engage in behavior we really shouldn't be engaging in.
- Let's think about two skaters, Nancy Kerrigan, who, in 1992, was the Olympic bronze medalist, and Tanya Harding, the only American to have ever landed a triple axel in competition. The two are rivals competing for spots in the US Olympic Team.
- They both trained incredibly hard. And yet, something terrible happened. In what was termed the whack heard round the world, A man came up and, after practice, came up to Nancy Kerrigan and with a pole, whacked her knee, throwing her out of practice for weeks.
- It turns out, it wasn't just anybody, it was somebody that Tonya Harding had hired to take out Nancy Kerrigan. So not only were they competing by working extra hard, they're also competing by trying to pull somebody else down. And comparisons can motivate unethical behavior.
- We'll talk about a different rivalry. This is a rivalry between Virgin and British Airways. Where British Airways invested heavily. They supported the London Eye. And then, Branson paid to have a blimp fly over London with the words BA can't get it up, taunting British Airways.
- This rivalry ended up spilling over not just to trash talking and constructive competition. But it ended up, British Airways was hacking into Virgin's system, looking at the reservations, engaging in unethical practices to try to steal customers away in a way that ended up getting them in real trouble.
- Now, it happens broadly, that is, in a study of professional soccer rivalries that Adam Gilinsky and others have done. They found that in analyzing matches, and these are matches between soccer teams playing in other cities, as well as co-located cities, that is, teams that both have home teams in that match. Those are likely to be the most intense rivals because of the co-location, and there they found more yellow and red cards, a measure of unethical behavior.

### Academics

- Here's another example, and this involves something a little bit closer to my heart, academics. Academics, we try to publish articles, but the publication process takes a long time.
- In the meantime, we can upload our articles onto the web, and there are websites that track how many times articles have been downloaded. When articles have been downloaded a lot of times it means, or suggests, that article's really important. And in fact, a lot of our peers look to see how often articles have been downloaded to see if that's something we should be reading, something we should be paying attention to, and we use as a measure of what's important.
- It turn out the one really funny thing about that as measure of importance is that sometimes you can manipulate these numbers. **You can, for example, download your own article. And in fact, some faculty have even written programs to download their own article. Now, who would do that? Well it turns out, comparisons help us understand that. So when you have peers who have high download counts, that's actually an important factor in determining how tempted and how likely you might be to download your own article.** And there are also some reference points and goals that matter too.
- **If you're close to reaching the top 10, that also is more likely to push people to engage in this kind of behavior.**
- We can think about this more broadly. So this is a story about Rhonda. She was selected from a pool of people in her company who seem to have great promise. And she was selected by a manager to take additional classes, develop her computer skills. She was being groomed for promotion. Now this is exactly what companies should be doing. That is, we should be looking to look at the people who have promise, and we should develop them for promotion. But there's a comparison problem, and here is that problem, that is, her co-workers, looking around her and engaging in comparisons. And they're engaging comparisons they don't like. So they began ostracizing her, not inviting her to parties, not passing along messages to her. So her work was suffering, and here as a result, it becomes more difficult for Rhonda to succeed. And it's also less pleasant for Rhonda, it's like being the employee of the month that nobody wants to talk to. And here in some cases, it can lead people like Rhonda to take their foot off the gas and end up investing less effort, because they don't want to be that teacher's pet, that employee of the month, or that selected employee. So when you think about how some of these comparison processes can actually erode the very behaviors we're actually looking to accomplish.
- Now, this tells us that comparisons can make us not just miserable, but they can also increase cheating.

## Comparisons: Finding Your Balance

- **So we know that comparisons can motivate us, and that can be very constructive. But they can also create resentment, and make us perfectly miserable. How do we find that balance? You want to be motivated, but satisfied.** And here's some key rules, one, we want to think about favorable comparisons, that is, comparisons where we look down at people that haven't accomplished quite as much. We can do this, for example, by volunteering or helping out people in need. By doing that, it'll make us happier. So, one way to make ourselves happier is to engage in these downward comparisons.
- So favorable comparisons can make us happier, other ones can motivate us, but they can both do things that aren't as good, like making us dissatisfied or less motivated. We can think about comparisons In the negotiation process, where they both motivate us and influence how happy we are. You can think, for example in negotiation, you might have some targets, some aspiration, somewhere you're trying to hit.
- So you have something up high that can motivate us and push us hard, and something lower, our reservation price, that can make us, in comparison, happy. That is in a negotiation, we're not going to get everything we wanted, most of the time, so we're going to fall short of our target. And, we're likely to get something better than our alternative, what our reservation price is, and so we're going to end up somewhere in the middle.
- Now it depends on where we focus. If we focus people's attention on targets, if we're focused on a target, we're going to be more motivated, but less satisfied.
- If we focus on our reservation price, we're going to be less motivated but more satisfied. In fact, that's exactly what happened. So here in this study that Adam Galinsky and colleagues ran, people focused on targets ended up doing better than people who focused on their alternatives throughout their reservation price. But people who focused on their target were less satisfied than those who focused on the reservation. So here we can think about trying to use comparisons to our advantage. So during the negotiation process, we like to focus on our targets, but then afterwards, we like to think about our reservation price, and that can make us more satisfied. So we want the benefits of that higher motivation, as well as the benefits of feeling more satisfied, and that can involve shifting our attention.
- So, that's how we can think about comparisons in negotiations. But it's not just negotiations, it happens more broadly. And here is another funny puzzle, when you think about the benefit of graduating in a recession, now why should there be a benefit? If you graduate in a recession, it's actually harder to find a job, and if you do find a job, it's likely to be less highly compensated, and actually people have studied the effects of gradual recession are long lasting. So you end up with a lower starting salary, and that follows you for a long time. **But what's the benefit? Well it turns out people who find a job in a recession are actually much happier, even though they're making up to 15% less.**
- They're happier because of the comparison. They're happier because they actually got a job, and they realized that, many of their peers ended up doing less well.
- So here we can think about comparisons helping us make sense of a lot of unusual phenomenon, both in negotiation and in our workplace, and more broadly.
- Here are three key principles of social comparisons, or think about three key things that help us find our balance.
    - **The first idea, is that we want to think about comparisons that go in or out of order. Now, by in or out of order what I mean is, is this the expected comparison outcome that was anticipated? So if we are competitors, what do we expect?** If we're siblings, who's older? So we talked about we David and Milliband. David, the older brother, was bested by his younger brother. Now, in contrast, think about the Kennedy's, so here we have the Kennedy's where the siblings were going in order. Where the brothers collaborated, because they were helping each other go from one step to the next. And they went from one step to the next completely in order.
    - Now, more recently, Serena has dominated on the tennis scene. She's eclipsed her bigger sister. But things went in order. It was Venus, the older sister, that was dominant first. And Serena even said that as she was growing up, everything was about Venus. That's how it was supposed to be. And there, when Serena began to win and beat Venus, she was going in order and even though she now has a much more impressive record, that going in order turns out to be very important. And it's actually enabled them to be incredibly effective as doubles partners. In fact, they have one of the most impressive doubles partners records of all time, where their record is 21 and 1 in women's doubles finals. And they have three Olympic gold medals to share.
- The other key idea is providing opportunities to compete in the future. So what then is particularly painful about, say, the Olympics, is that for many athletes, this is their one chance. For Abel Kiviat, for example, he lost out, he never won the gold. He was not in that race and there wasn't another future opportunity for him. **So if we have opportunities to compete in the future, those comparisons are going to be less intense.**
- **The third key principle, is to think about the perspective of other people. When good things happen to us, we often are pretty happy, and then we'll say I'm so happy for you, you really deserve it. They might or might not be, that is they might be privately quite upset, but we don't typically get to hear that.** To suggest that these comparisons are really quite intense, and it really is a phenomenon that travels across culturally, quite well. I'm going to share a Russian parable. And as a lot of parables happen, there's a man who finds a lamp, rubs it, a genie emerges, and the genie says, you can have any wish you want. But here's the twist. In this case, the genie says, the twist is your neighbor gets double.
- So you can have anything you want, but your neighbor gets double. Well, the man paces back and forth, rubs his brow, thinks very deeply and hard about it. And finally says I know what I want. “I want you to poke out one of my eyes.”
- Here, we can see that the comparison process is so intense, it's so invidious that, here, the person's so worried about having something good, because the neighbor, in comparison, will do even better. And so think about these comparisons, it's important even when good things happen to us, to recognize that others are going to make these comparisons. And they might be less satisfied, at least than they might appear outwardly.


- Next you want to think about the challenge of cooperation. How do we get people to cooperate with us even when they might be better off themselves, if they didn't have to work so hard, or didn't have to help us out? I want to start with a story. And this is a story about a homicide detective, Marshall Frank.
- He's a very experienced detective, and he had this one case, where he knew Paul Rowles was guilty. He knew it, but he couldn't prove it and what he really wanted was a confession.
- So he sat down with Paul Rowles and, in this case, Rowles' neighbor had been strangled and Detective Frank was going for this confession. Now, in this interrogation what's interesting is that Rowels knows that this is the game, that is he knows the detective wants a confession.
- And in 30 minutes Detective Frank ended up getting that confession. So he ended up getting somebody to be cooperative with what he wanted, he wanted this confession and he did it relatively fast. And one question I want to ask is, how? And I want to suggest that this really speaks to the idea of cooperation. How do they get people to step over and help us out do things that we want even when it's not in their own best interest? So it's related to other questions that are very different. So would you let a complete stranger sleep in your house? Well generally not, but that's exactly what Airbnb is predicated upon. That is, it's a system that allows people to do exactly that.
- So we think about how to cooperate in a social dilemma. A social dilemma is a multi party prisoner's dilemma. So the prisoner dilemma case is just two people. But we often have a lot of cases with multiple people. So we can think about things like, how do we work together to reduce car emissions? We want everyone to smog test their car. But individually, we'd rather not smog test our own car. Or we think about, over fishing, we'd rather everybody else cut back with fishing. But individually we would rather fish as much as we could. So individually we have incentives to defect or do what's in our own best interests, but collectively we would like everybody to come together and do what's best for the collective. So those are social dilemmas. How do we solve those? And we can think about the prisoner's dilemma as the first case. That is, this is the fruit fly of the social dilemma problem.
- Now in the classic prisoner's dilemma, we have two people. So you can think about Detective Frank's case, you'd like to get a confession, and if they confess, it's going to be easier for the whole legal process to go forward. But individually, for that potential criminal, it's not great for them individually to confess. Now imagine you've caught two people. They could tattle on each other, and confess, or they could not confess. Here I'm thinking about cooperation with each other. So, imagine these two criminals like to cooperate. They like to cooperate with each other, and not confess. So, if they don't confess, then they both end up with a light sentence. There isn't a lot of evidence that can't be prosecuted for that much so they both get a very light sentence, say, six months. Now, if they both do confess, they both get five years. So clearly the're better off if they both cooperate with each other and don't confess. Now, here's what's interesting. If one of them defects or one of them cooperates with the defense, and spills the beans about the whole story, and the other one doesn't. Well, imagine a detective here who says look, I'm going to give you a special deal.
- If you spill the beans, another one doesn't, you're going to go free but the other person is going to get 10 years. So, individually here, the person who's facing this problem really has a dilemma. They could try to do what's best for that group, the collective and cooperate. Or they could defect and do what's best for themselves in which case they end up with a better outcome. Now in this case, they always end up with the better outcome no matter what their counter part does. So if their counter part is going to talk, they'd rather talk, if their counter part's not going to talk, they're still better off talking.
- So individually they still have this drive to do what's in their best interest, their own selfish interest. But we want to push people to cooperate, even though it's costly for them.
- So we want to think about how do we do that? How do we get a coworker to stay late, take up an extra assignment? How do we get our kids to do more chores around the house? How do we get our spouse to help us out more? Even when they'd rather hang out on the couch. Watch TV or do something else. So we have this constant problem both at work and at home, to try to get people to cooperate even when they're pulled in the opposite direction with their own self interest. And we can think about a lot of social dilemmas. So I talked about greenhouse gases before and over fishing, but we're going to try and conserve water. We want everybody to take shorter showers, but ourselves we like to take that longer shower. Or contributing to things like public radio, but working on a project and in many negotiation settings, we could share more information which helps to create value. But it might be at odds with our own individual interests in trying to claim value.
- So we have this tension. Now as a manager, managers are constantly trying to solve this social dilemma. They're trying to get people to cooperate when people might naturally be pulled in opposite directions. Here's some ides. Here's things that facilitate cooperation. First, we want to build relationships. So the more people identify with us, the better. Sociologists call this the Shadow of the Past. So if we have team bonding experiences, we have a shared history. That will bind us together and will create a sense of we're all in this together. We have a shared goal here, and that shared goal gets people to cooperate more effectively. It relates to this idea of a shared identity. So do I see myself as part of this group? So the names that we call each other, so are we partners? Are we employees? Do I think of myself? Do I wear logoed clothing that has my company name on it? Do I see myself as part of this organization? And the stronger that sense of identify, the stronger cooperation is. And then third, sociologists have this term, Shadow of the Future, for how likely we are to interact in the future. So if I know this is a long term relationship, then helping you out now is a much easier thing to do because I know there's going to be a time in the future that you might help me out as well. So the longer the future horizon is, the more likely we are to get cooperation. So the past identity is a sign of the future. A couple of other things that are important for cooperation, what is clear communication? So can I communicate what I need, and why I need it clearly? And can we figure out a way to collaborate? So the better the communication, the more effective the cooperation. And this is going to mean that face-to-face communication is particularly important. Face-to-face communication's important for a lot of different reasons that we'll talk about. But one is it allows the most complete kind of communication we can get. And the next we're thinking about expectations. So what expectations do we have in this? Am I communicating that I really care about my own self-interest, or am I communicating we're all in this together? So, people have actually played the prisoner's dilemma game with experiments for money or other prizes. And what they found is that when you describe the game as a community game people are far more cooperative than if people would describe it as the Wall Street Game. And the Wall Street Game people put on this lens or mentality that they're in it for themselves, and end up being much more competitive.
- So the way we describe things, the expectations that we set, profoundly influence how cooperative people are. They're trying to figure out what game are we playing. And the way we communicate is going to profoundly influence that.
- Next to think about accountabilities. So can we observe behavior? So I talked about saving water. Now, people are more likely to cut back on watering their lawn because their neighbors can see that, taking a shorter shower is harder to observe. When we can't observe people cooperating or defecting, people are more likely to defect. And anonymity hurts cooperation. And things like rating systems which makes AirBnb effective help cooperation.
- And the more broadly, trust. If we can build a trusting relationship then we get cooperation. And we'll say a bit more about trust. So here are the key ideas. Shadow of the past, what we've done in the past. A shared identity. I identify myself with this group. A shadow of the future, this future interaction we're going to have. Effective and clear communication. We set expectations for cooperation. We hold people accountable. That means we can observe what they do and the repercussions for what they do. You can think about taxes, for example. We sometimes audit people's taxes. There are penalties for not paying taxes. It's a way to get people to cooperate for the collective good. Even though that individually they'd rather not, and then trust. The more trusting our relationships, the more effective cooperation is.
