# Week 1

## Introduction to the Course

Kindiness: altruism or pro-social behavior. As when, with no obvious payoff, we're nice to another individual. Without prompting, a toddler opens a cabinet when the adult can't get it opened.

There's kindness, but there's also cruelty. There's evil. There's viciousness. Think of the woman who threw the cat in the garbage can. Strangers were mad at her. They weren't involved. They weren't harmed.

And I think this sort of incident tells us something interesting about morality. Which is that morality matters. When I see something evil being done, even if I'm not involved in it, there's often a punitive impulse. There's an impulse that. The perpetrator should be punished. Justice should be done. And the question of where that comes from, how the system evolved.

How on the one hand do we have a psychology built for empathy and compassion and kindness, as in that child helping the man. And in another way have a psychology built for justice, for punishment, as in the case of the attacks on this woman.

Where does this all come from? And those are questions that occupy us. We'll also be interested, and this is my third example, in human differences. Hundreds of years ago, in the state of Conneticut in which I'm lecturing, people owned slaves. That is people owned other people.

I would imagine very few of you think slavery is right. Very few of you think slavery is moral. But hundreds of years ago people did practice slavery. And many people thought it wasn't wrong. In fact, many people thought that slavery was a moral institution justified by the Bible, justified by history.

What can we say about the psychology of the people back then who thought so differently from how we think? And what can we say about the changes that brought us form then to now? What is the proper explanation for why our views about something like slavery Have changed so radically over history.

Now moral differences aren't just a matter of history. They're not just a matter of then versus now. They're also a matter of clashes between cultures.

One view of things, the view which I actually hold is that the, the, the mass murder of Americans was a horribly immoral act. And the punishment however to punishment or murder of Bin Laden was a just retribution.

But there are many people around the world who see things very differently. They might see that hack on America as a just, reasonable, moral act and the murder of Bin Laden as a cowardly retaliation. The people who orchestrated That hacks 9/11 were not by any standard insane. They were not by any normal standard psychopaths.

Rather, they were driven by a moral vision. Now, again, some moral vision eyes see as grossly mistaken but they see mind as grossly mistaken and at the very minimum then What we need to do as scientists interested in morality is come to grips with the fact that people have such different moral views.

And understand why we have these moral views, where they come from, and possibly how we can deal with these conflicts. Now these are all examples of moral differences between different societies separated by time. Or separated by space. But we could also ask about moral differences within a society.

So in the United States, there's huge differences in how people think about the morality of same sex relationships of gay couples. Again, the point of this course is not trying to commit you to, this view is right or that view or right.

That is just out of the bounds of what we'll be doing here. But we're very interested in, why do some people think this and why do some people think that.

I think this is a question of, both, great intellectual importance, and also great practical importance. And more generally I think, this course will, will talk about specific cases like that, but also deal with foundational issues, that, that I just find incredibly interesting.

So one such foundational issue, is attention between. Moral reasoning. Deliberative conscious thought, decision making thinking things through, the head, and your gut feelings. Your compassion, your emotion, your love, your disgust, your anger, your shame, the heart. And psychologists and philosophers along with theologians and legal scholars and many others Have long tried to address the question of the relative roles of reason and the emotion. In how we le, lead our moral lives and how we come to our moral ideas.

Even more generally than that, we will address the tension between what we call humanistic views. Our humanistic conception of humanity. Which deals with notions like free will. That sees people as, as agents that can make decisions. That can be blamed, that can be praised, that can be guilty. That, that, that, that can warrant punishment or warrant reward.

A view that might see us as almost as spiritual beings. Not reducible to the physical or, or mechanistic world. Beings with, be beings with souls. Creatures capable not only of wrongness, but also capable of sin. You have that and you have that humanistic view.

And then you have a scientific view. And a scientific view tries to explain our natures in terms of the language of neuroscience, the language of neurons and dendrites, and the limbic system, and the frontal lobe. The language of genes, talks about environmental cues, talks about the effects of parenting, the effects of, of, of one's physical, and social, and emotional environment.

And the question that will occupy us that has occupied me for as, as long as I could remember, is can we reconcile these two views. By our genes and by our environment. Can we say that, and also say that people make choices. And that people should be blamed for their choices or praised for their choices. That people are moral creatures more than anything else on this planet.

Can we reconcile the humanist perspective on us in a scientific perspective? And that's something that we'll be struggling with throughout this course.

So, why would you want to take this course? One reason is the topics are just fascinating. I, Again, I'm, I'm admittedly biased, but who isn't interested in the question of why do some people become violent psychopaths. Who isn't really interested in questions of how are liberals Different from conservatives. How are the fundamentalists different from atheists? How are they better people? Are they worse people? What's the evidence?

A second reason to take the course is that, as we talk about these issues of morality, we will be discussing, and reading, and learning about different domains of both the sciences and the humanities. So a lot of the basis for this work will come from psychology. And we will read and talk about social psychology, developmental psychology, clinical psychology, neuroscience as well as other domains.

The third reason to take the course, and I'm raising this maybe most tenatively. Is that it might make us better people. I am under no illusion that after having read about the studies of morality and read the developmental work and anthropology and neuroscience, that will then be particularly well equipped to say oh now I know that's right and that's wrong. I think understanding them more has nothing but positive benefits.

Why my politics is this and my religion is that And my belief about charity is this. Why I believe these things, I think that understanding where these beliefs and behaviors come from will actually help us in a better way improve on our moral lives.

## 1.1: What is Morality?

The first is there's no definition of morality that people agree on. So the philosopher Stephen Stich points out that philosophers have deep differences over what morality is.

There was a book published in 1970 called Definitions of Morality. And in that book. 13 of the best philosopherss in the world. Philosophers like Elizabeth Anscombe, Peter Strawson and Philippa Foot provided their definitions of what morality is. And Stich points out these definitions had very little in common. People had very different views. It doesn't get any different when you look at psychologists.

So the very prominent psychologist, Elliot Turiel, who's done significant work in the psychology of morality, defines morality in a pretty narrow way in terms of justice, rights, and harm. For him, something only counts as immoral if there's a victim, if someone suffers.

In contrast, Jonathan Haidt, whose work we're going to talk about throughout this course. Has a much broader definition of morality. For him, anything that suppresses self-interest and makes cooperation possible is part of morality.

So for Haidt, a religious ritual might be part of our moral psychology, part of our moral life. For Turiel it wouldn't be. So given the sort of disagreement, it would be arbitrary for me to pick out a single definition of morality and go with that.

Also, my view is that beginning with a definition is never a good idea when you're dealing with scientific questions.

Rather what you do is you begin with a rough idea of what you're talking about, and then you're understanding what counts as falling within that domain shifts as a result of your understanding.

I think if we ever get a definition of morality, it means we're kind of finished, the study of it. And we're nowhere near that point now. We're just beginning. Still, in order to study anything, you need a rough idea what you're studying and so I want to begin with, by talking about what counts as a moral violation. What counts as something wrong?

It's related to notions of reward and punishment. Good things are rewarded and bad things are punished and it's related to emotion such as guilt, shame anger and gratitude. Wrong behavior evokes certain emotional responses. Now, this is a simple example of moral violation. Obviously not the worst thing you could imagine, but a sort of simple and direct. But, there are other moral violations that don't quite fit this mould.

So for one thing, you don't have to, make physical contact to somebody, in order to do something wrong. Most of us would believe it's wrong to shout a racist insult at somebody, or threaten to kill them, or spread lies about them. You could harm people in ways that aren't physical.

You could be immoral by negligence. So, if after the filming of this lecture I get together with the gentlemen operating the cameras, we all get roaring drunk. And I get back into my car and start to drive home. Most people say I'm doing something wrong. Not because I have any ill feelings not because I've hurt anybody, but because I'm, I'm foolishly acting in a way which could harm people.

You could be immoral in some cases by not doing anything at all. So if I choose not to feed my dog, then my dog starves to death. That's awful. If I choose not to feed my child, my baby, that's even more awful. That's murder.

Because I have obligations to those individuals that require, that morally require, that I do things. Now there are some cases where What counts as immoral is different from what counts as illegal and these cases are particularly salient with regard to issues of when you should do something.

So I'm thinking particularly of an example. A few years ago, these two guys Jeremy Strohmeyer and David Cash Jr., they go into a casino in Nevada. And Jeremy Strohmeyer sees this little girl. Gets her to come with him into the women's bathroom, and molests and murders her. He is later caught, you know, charged, sentenced.

Plainly what he did was terrible. But I'm more interested here in what his friend did, which is nothing. His friend sort of said, half-heartedly, tried to get Strohmeyer to stop, got bored, and went for a walk. Now it turns out he didn't do anything legally wrong. At the time in Nevada it's not a crime to allow somebody else to do a crime. And in fact, so, so he wasn't charged with anything. And in fact he didn't really feel wrong about what he did. He was later interviewed on the radio. And, and when he was asked his feelings, he said he said this.

The simple fact remains I don't know this little girl. And then he, he said more generally, I don't know people in Panama or Africa who are killed every day, so I can't feel remorse for them. And he went on, why should I feel remorse for this girl? I didn't do anything wrong.

Other people disagreed. And although he was never charged with a crime because he didn't commit the crime, there were protests, there were, there were people. He was a student at University of California at Berkeley, and people protested, demanded that he get thrown out of school. For what he did. And even now, years later, if you look up his name online you'll see there are people stalking him. They don't know him. But they'll stalk him. They want to make sure that, that everybody knows what he did, and that he suffers for what he did.

And this is another, this is a way in which morality can have broad scope. Another sort of example. Is that not all moral violations involve victims. Or least they don't always involve victims in clear and obvious sense. I have here a list of some things. Most of which are illegal in the United States.

> Drug use, voluntary selling of bodily organs, prostitution, homosexuality, bestiality, incest between consenting adult siblings, cannibalism

Homosexuality used to be illegal in the United States. There were sodomy laws that were applied almost exclusively to homosexuals. Now, due to a Supreme Court decision, it's no longer illegal. The rest are still, in various forms, illegal, and they're illegal in other countries as well. 

Now your mileage may vary. Some people will look at this list and say, I don't see anything wrong with all of that. I mean, I don't want to indulge in any of this, but what consenting adults do is fine. It doesn't bother me. Others will see some of these as morally wrong.

And you might see some of these as morally wrong because you believe there really is a victim. You might think that although prostitution involves, on the face of it, consenting adults and so on, Still, the institution of prostitution is coercive and really does make people's lives worse. 

Or, you might think that these are wrong, not so much because they harm somebody but simply because they're wrong. Take consensual cannibalism. Somebody dies, and in their will they say, after I'm dead someone else could eat me. It's all consent, and so on. But some people say that's just not right. I don't care if nobody's harmed. We shouldn't be doing that, to one another.

And this is part of the scope of morality. You, you also get cases where, there isn't apparent harm, and it seems wrong, even when it doesn't rise to the level, of a crime. Suppose I get together with my friends, say fellow Yale professors. Suppose we are sitting in a club, we're sipping sherry, and we're all white males. And we start enga-, telling jokes, and we say, you know, sexist jokes and racist jokes, the most foul jokes you could imagine. But still, we're telling, we're telling the jokes and we leave and we're happier than when we came in.

And nobody hurts and nobody's feelings were hurt. But still, there is the intuition in at least some of us that, that was wrong. You know, you shouldn't be doing that sort of thing. So, the scope of morality is broad. I'm trying to sort of persuade you that what counts as right and wrong has, has broad scope.

Morality is everywhere. A lot of my examples involve sex, and clearly, many, there are certain acts of sex that most everybody find wrong. You, people find it wrong, the idea of sex with a young child. Certainly sex that involves coercion is wrong. People have different attitutes about promiscuity, virginity, heterosexuality, homosexuality bisexuality. Bestiality, masturbation, fetishes. And these differences are profound.

What counts as a, a moral violation for one person could be a point of pride for another. This guy walks into a church. And he goes to a confessional booth. And he immediately says, Father, I'm 70 years old. And I have sex. I have had sex with two 20 year olds. And the priest is kind of stunned. And says, how long has it been since your last confession? And the guy says, I've never been to confession before. I'm not Catholic. And the priest says, so why are you telling me this? And the guy says, I'm telling everybody.

What could be a point of pride to one could be a point of disgust to another. Food. Most people have some moral restrictions on what to eat. For some of us, these moral restrictions are grounded in religion. Other people have more restrictions on what they can eat because of concerns about the suffering of animals. Or worries about damage to the ecosystem.

The most obvious cases of morality, involve family and friends. So, we feel moral obligation towards our family and friends, we, we feel gratitude when people do right by us, betrayed if they don't. The most obvious example is the obligation that a mother or father has towards a child. But these obligations extend. They extend towards siblings. They extend towards people who aren't related but are married, are close friends and so on.

Morality applies to strangers as well. Many of us give to charity and many of us give to charity to help people we don't know and who will never help us back. Even if you don't give this to charity, you believe you have some moral obligations to strangers. You can't kill them, for instance. You can't make them suffer.

Politics is full of morality. Now, I don't want to, I don't want to overstate this. There are some political differences that people have that aren't moral. You may, you and I may share the same goal. We agree on the morality. Now we're sort of struggling with this, with the question of how to do it?

As I'm giving this lecture, the United States is currently in, the United States Congress is currently debating over whether to allow Obama to bomb Syria. Now, there's a lot of practical issues here, but a lot of those questions fundamentally moral? Is it right? To, to, to initiate bombing of another country, an act will for surely kill innocents?

Is it right to do nothing, and then let a dictator who commits acts of chemical warfare to go free, to go unpunished? And people have very different intuitions. And again, some of the intuitions are instrumental.

Instrumental meaning that we agree on the goals, we're just trying to figure how to satisfy them. But some of them are more moral. Honest to God disagreements over what the right thing is to do.

My final example of the scope and importance of morality comes from a lovely and quite weird study done in the 1930s by the American psychologist, Thorndike. Thorndike asked people different questions about different activities.

How much money would I have to pay you to do this activity? Now some, some of the activities. They were all unpleasant. But, they were different kinds of unpleasant. So, some were unpleasant just because they were painful, or degrading, or, or, or awful in some way.

How much would I have to pay you to eat a live earthworm, was one of his questions. Or here's another one. How much would I have to pay you to have one of your front teeth removed with a pair of pliers? No anesthesia. That's one of his questions. He also asks questions about moral violations. How much would he have to pay you to do something bad? And, and it's not physically painful, but they're bad. So, one of his answers was, one of his questions was, how much would I have to pay you to strangle a cat with your bare hands? Here are his answers for those two items.

I've taken his answers, he, he got answers, of course in the 1930s dollars. I've translated them, translated them into the money that you'd have to pay now. For the tooth, its an average of 74,000 dollars. For the cat, it's 164,000 dollars. Over twice as much. And that tells us something. That tells us about the pull that morality has. 

That, that it matters so much that we want to be good people. We don’t want to do this bad thing. That, that we would have to, we would rather have an experience of excruciating pain. So, that's morality as we see it.

> Adam Smith: in treating of the principles of morality, there are two questions to be considered. Wherein does virtue consist? What is the tone of temper and tenor of conduct which constitutes the excellent and praiseworthy character? The character which is the natural object of esteem, honor, and approbation.

He's asking a question. Which we would now says is a philosophical question. A normative question. How should we live? What is it to be a good person? What is it to be a virtuous person?

Or in other words, how and by what means does it come to pass that a mind prefers one tenor of conduct to another? Denominates the one right and the other wrong. Considers the one is the object of approbation on a reward and other of blame center and punishment.

But this is a different question. Now he's not asking what is the good. Now he's asking what's going on in our minds, and our brains. That causes us to say, that's good, and that's bad. That's the right way to live, and that's the wrong way to live.

And throughout this course we're going to deal with both questions. We're mostly interested in a psychological question. We're mostly interested in how people think about morality. What, what governs people's choices? What governs people's intuitions?

## 1.2: Philosophical Approaches

What is it to be good? What distinguishes good from, from evil? Right from wrong?

#### Consequentialism

- David Hume, John Stuart Mill, Jeremy Bentham.
- Results matter. Consequences matter. You should always act in a way that's going to promote the best consequences, that's going to make the world better. What it is to do good, is to make the world better. What it is to do bad, is to make the world worse.
- Pleasure and pain. Add everything up for one option, and you add everything up for your other options. And then you choose the action that's going to produce the greatest overall amount of good.
- Bentham thinks torture is justifiable if the tortured person can set of a bomb or something which will hurt more people.
- Homosexuality, they get pleasure anyway. And these are private acts.
- Nothing was said about God. It gives up what a lot of people think is central to morality.

#### Critics of C

- It often forces us to accept as moral, things that intuitively in our gut, just awful. If torturing a child makes other people happy, then it's okay.
- There is nothing about family and friendship. If your son needs an operation to save his life, it is better to give the money to poor people to save their lives.
- It may just miss the point of morality. Cs think rape is wrong because of the suffering of the victim. But they might think that if multiple people got happy, or the victim did not feel anything, that rape is okay. This misses the point about rape or murder or torture. The point is people have a right not to be harmed. There's a wrongness to assaulting somebody, that transcends the balance of pain and pleasure.

#### Deontology

- There has to be some moral rules. Even if an action causes more pain than pleasure. 
- Immanuel Kant tried to ground his approach to morality on pure reason. He argued to forget about gut feelings and emotion.
- Hypothetical imperative: Our desires. If you want water, drink it.
- Categorical imperative: Grounded on reason. Act as if you action would become a universal law.
- Universal law: So when you decide to do, to do this versus do that. You should ask yourself, if everybody did this versus that? How would the world be? Would it demolish our way of living?
- Ex: Lying. Cs say lie only dependin on the consequence. K says you should never lie, because if everyone lied it would suck. This means you won't lie to a murderer when he asks you where his victim is.
- D theory gives you clean answers. Torture becomes wrong, even if you are able to save 100 people. So D has some sort of better moral compass than C.

#### Critics of D

- It's crazy.
- Where do the rules come from? K says reason, and critics say it's not. It's grounded on prejudices and biases. K thought homosexuality and pornography was wrong, for instance.

## 1.3: Reason vs. Emotions

- Trolley problem. Most peopel think okay to switch, but not to push the man. This means we aren't Cs. 5 > 1 in both but we don't do the same thing in both.
- Doctrine of Double Effect: There's a distinction between doing something bad, like killing or harming somebody as an unintended consequence of causing greater good to happen, and that could be the right thing to do, versus doing something bad, like killing or harming somebody in order to bring about a greater good, and that you shouldn't do. The consequences are identical. But the difference is that in one case, the bad thing is a __regrettable byproduct__. In the bad case, it's an instrument through which you act. So, this often comes up, in case, cases of just war. Or, or, or in philosophical debates and political debates over, over what's permissible in war time.
- Ex: Bomb a munitions factory to defeat the enemy, end the war, but kill the innocent workers in the factory? DoDE says that they are collateral damage. But you should do it.
- This is why we think so differently about these two cases. In the switch case, one person dies but their death is an accident and their death does nothing. In the bridge case, the person's death is necessary.
- There has been a backlash in the last decade: We should not think of people as, as these philosophical creatures doing these abstract rules, rather moral, morality is driven to a large extent by gut feelings.
- In the same way that you just know if something is disgusting or beautiful, moral judgments are rapid intuitive decisions and involve the emotional-processing parts of the brain. 
- A lot of our morality is driven by our gut.
- The idea is that if we think reason is important, we are mistaking the tail for the dog. It's, it's the motion that counts. Haidt writes, moral judge, reasoning does
not cause moral judgment; rather moral reasoning is usually a post hoc construction generated after a judgment has been reached.
- David Hume talking about moral reasoning says, look, our moral decisions, our moral understanding is not driven by reason. Rather, he says, reason is, and ought only to be, the slave of the passions.

## 1.4: The Case of Disgust

Disgust is a human universal. It shows up in every culture.  When you're disgusted by something, you don't want to touch it. You, you, you don't want to smell it, and you certainly don't want to eat it. You don't want it in your mouth.

In the extreme, something sufficiently disgusting could make you vomit, and it will, always illicit this distinctive emotion, this distinctive feeling, that we identify, as disgust.

Evolutionary psychologists, interested in emotions, have argued that this feeling evolved for a certain function. It evolved to motivate us, to avoid parasites and poisons. So you think of the things that we are disgusted by, and they share certain things in common. They could poison us, they, they have infectious properties.

But, one of the most troubling facts about disgust, is that people can be disgusting. And this was something pointed out by Charles Darwin, who was always a wonderful and acute observer of of human interaction. Whilst I felt utter disgust at my food being touched by a naked savage, though his hands did not appear dirty.

People are disgusting. Our response to strangers, our response to being touched by strangers, to, to smelling strangers and so on, is often a response of disgust. Now, there's some debate in the field as to, why people illicit disgust.

Some scholars say, people illicit disgust because people carry diseases. Strange people will carry strange diseases.

Others argue that it's not really that, rather, people are disgusting because we are fleshy things. We are made of meat. We, we, we produce feces, and urine, and other things. We, we are, we are animal like things and if you think of people in that way, you can be readily disgusted by them.

Once you are disgusted by them, it can have moral effects, it could have consequences and the consequences of being disgusted by somebody, of being disgusted by a group of people, are profoundly negative.

Every genocidal movement that, that has left a record, exhibits signs that disgust was used, to illicit hatred towards the despised group. Most movements involving prejudice and discrimination, don't just say those people, they're rotten, they're stupid, they're mean. They also say, they're disgusting.

This is an insight that the philosopher Martha Nessbaum, nicely summarizes. Throughout history, certain disgust properties, sliminess, bad smell, stickiness, decay, foulness, have repeatedly and monotonously been associated with Jews, women, homosexuals, untouchables, lower class people.

All of those are imagined as tainted, by the dirt of the body. and, and this is an example from Nazi propaganda. But there are, are countless such examples, where a despised group is described as, disgusting. There seems to be a natural connection to being disgusted by somebody and, not caring about them.

In fact, wanting them to suffer. Psychologists have studied disgust in the lab. And there's different ways to do it. So, one way to do it is, you can see how easily disgusted people are, and then see how much their disgust sensitivity, predicts other properties about them.

And it turns out that, that your disgust sensitivity is related to certain interesting facts about you. Women, on average, are more disgust sensitive, than men. There's evidence that women become particularly disgust sensitive, at a certain vulnerable point in pregnancy.

Political conservatives, tend to be more disgust sensitive, than political liberals. And most important for what we're talking about here, your disgust sensitivity corresponds to, certain moral attitudes. So for instance, in some, some research finds, that people who are very disgust sensitive, are more likely to be, express negative moral attitudes about homosexuals.

Turns out, being grossed out by this fart spray, doesn't influence your feelings about tax policy. And it doesn't influence your feelings about the environment or, or other things. But it does affect, how you think about groups like homosexuals.

It makes you harsher towards them. It also makes you harsher towards moral violations, you could called purity violations. Like consensual incest or or masturbation in an inappropriate place or stuff like that. If you're disgusted, you're more disapproving.

And these studies suggest that, your feelings about somebody or, or what somebody does, can be influenced by your emotional state. In particular, your emotional state of disgust. Now disgust can also influence certain specific moral judgments. So, so far I've been talking more or less about, moral feelings towards somebody. But what about judgments about, what's right and wrong?

Well, Jonathan Haidt thought up some very interesting examples. And he uses these examples to show that, even people who think, that they're very liberal and quite consequential, can be influenced in their judgments of morality, by whether or not, something disgusts them.

Examples

-  Julie and Mark are our sister and brother. They're adults, they travel together. They decide to have sex with one another. Now, they're very cognizant of worries of having pregnancy and so on, so they use tons of birth control. There's no chance, that, that, that she'll get pregnant. And they have sex and it's great. And they do it several times, and they just love it. And then they decide, they're not going to tell anybody, and and they're not going to do it again. Did Julie and Mark do something wrong?
- Family dog runs out in the street, gets hit by a car. Family brings the dog in, very sad. But then they realize, they have nothing planned for supper tonight. So they cook the dog and eat it. And it's delicious, and they're very happy.
-  The toilet is very dirty but this guy has run out of cleaning supplies, and wants to clean the toilet. Fortunately, he has an American flag. Takes the flag and uses it,
to scrub the toiler clean. Now he's happy, clean toilet. Has he done anything wrong?
-  The chicken case is, this guy goes to supermarket, he buys a chicken, he brings the chicken back home. It's not a live chicken, like a chicken, like you, from the supermarket, he makes love to the chicken, has sex with the chicken. And then he cooks it and eats it. Has he done something wrong?

I'm not asking you, whether he's done something which grosses you out. I, I imagine, you have an answer to that. Has he done anything wrong?

Now, what Haidt finds is, for these sorts of examples, he finds a couple of things. First thing is that, most people, almost everybody find so many things wrong, they find them morally wrong. The exceptions are liberal, highly liberal students from elite universities.

Some of them say no, those are all okay, no one's harmed. But most people, almost everybody, find them wrong. But he also finds, that people are, not usually able to explain, what they find, wrong about them. And he calls this, moral dumbfounding.

Incest: No chance to get pregnant. Other people will not find out. People struggle to find an explanation why they think it is wrong.  Rather, their reaction is because these things disgust them. And because they're disgusting, they're found to be immoral. And if he's right, this would be a case where, our emotions and not our reason, are driving moral judgment.

## 1.5: Cute and Sexy

Our gut feelings can be positive towards somebody. Babies: Very easy to feel fondly towards, that will elicit a desire to protect. It's because it's adorable, because, because of the big eyes and the round cheeks and these sort of cues that we've been wired up to respond to.

And, and, and our, the effects of these cues and how we feel towards people and how we feel towards creatures has, has real effects. Here are two animals. Now, I actually don't have a strong opinion as to which animal is smarter, which animal has a richer emotional life. Which animal feels more pain.

But, what's not a hard question is I know which animal people care about more. One animal we bring into our houses, and we we, we give treats to, and we hold birthday parties for, and we love. And, the other kind of animal we eat. And this does not have to do with the features of the animal.

It has to do with, with how they look. Kittens are cute. Pigs are not. There are other distinctions one could make, more subtle distinctions one could make, concerning sort of positive responses.

And their effects on moral reasoning. So, one research program I've been interested in is, concerns the effects of looking at people's bodies, and to what extent does looking at people's bodies affect how you judge them and think about them morally.

It turns out that when you see somebody's body, it has two effects on your reasoning about them. One is, you actually, in some way, care more about them. You think that they're more vulnerable to pain. You think they're more sensitive to, to, to, to being hurt. You worry a little bit more about them. But you also tend to deny them moral agency.

What I mean by this is that, for most of us, when you look at somebody, you say, well, there's a person that could be blamed, they could be praised, they're responsible for their own actions, they make their own decisions. But when you see somebody's body, that tendency to think of them as an agent goes down a bit. 

Now this, these pictures, the difference I'm showing you here is fairly subtle. And we thought in our experiments we'd be stuck with those sort of subtle distinctions until we found this wonderful book (30 Porn Star Portraits). And this book has photographs, side by side, of the very same men and women. But, in one picture, they're fully dressed. And in the other pictures, they're entirely naked.

We found that when people are naked, you tend, in some way, to be more concerned about them. But also, you tend to deny them moral agency. It really matters. There's something, there's some real psychological truth to the claim made by feminist scholars, that the objectification of women, thinking of women as sexual beings, as physical beings, has an effect, perhaps a pernicious effect on how you think about them and what we find in this work is, it applies to men as well as women.

If you did, you should put these two books together on your shelves separately and then people will look at them and they will wonder what kind of person you are. So, why do naked people, why do bodies, have this sort of effect on us?

One explanation is, that, they inspire lust. And lust somehow blocks certain morals. Sentiment makes you think about a person a different way. Another possibility, that is sort of separate from lust, is that if you see somebody without clothes. They're more like an animal, they lose their dignity. They lose their status. And it's that which is driving the effect.

And we actually, in our research, we don't know the answer to that. But we do know, from other work, that the feeling of lust, the feeling of sexual arousal can have an affect on your moral decision making.

Dan Ariely experiment (the masturbating thing): So you could ask people whether or not they could imagine being attracted to a 12-year-old girl. And it turns out if people were non-aroused, like, you know, a quarter say yeah. But when they're aroused, it doubles. Or or becoming sexually excited, by an animal.

The most disturbing findings involved a sort of date rapey, questions. Would you slip a woman a drug to increase the chances that she would have sex with you? When men were not aroused, 5% said yes. But this number got much, much bigger when they were aroused.

I, it tells people, that your psychology changes when you're aroused. You're no longer the same person in an important sense. Your sense of what turns you on when you're aroused is different from when you're not aroused. And it's yet another argument that our morality can be influenced by not just by reason, but by the emotions.

## 1.6: Returning to the Trolley

We said this might be because people have this abstract philosophical principle that sees, sort of, a subtle difference between these two, and for instance, the principle we talked about was, in the switch case, the guy dying is an accident, doesn't do any good.

In the bridge case the guy dying is essential. He's an instrument through which to bring about the good. And this was the analysis we had. But there's an alternative. This alternative was proposed by Joshua Green and has a lot of support. The alternative says, that's not what's happening at all.

And what he did was, he had people solve trolley problems, like reasonsabout moral problems, while they were hooked up to an fMRI. He found that the switch case activated parts of the brain in the frontal cortex, the part of the brain that's up front here. And these are parts of the brain that are typically involved concious deliberative reasoning. And these parts of the brains would be active and people would make their choice. And often their choice would be, yeah they should throw the switch, that makes sense. Five lives matter more than one life.

What about, the bridge case? Well here the same part of the brain, was active. Presumably doing the calculations of, five versus one. But also, various other parts of the brain that are involved in conflict and emotion, emotional feelings, light up stronger. And, for these sorts of cases, people say that you shouldn't push the man.

The way Green analyzes this is, it's not that there's some sort of subtle philosophical principle that governs the difference between the switch case and the bridge case. Rather, 

there's sort of two aspects of our moral psychology. There's controlled rational processes. And the controlled rational processes are, under Green's view, largely utilitarian. They just calculate consequences in a very cold-blooded way. But there's also automatic, involuntary, gut feelings.

And so what Green says is, for the switch case you just map. You, and so you have choosing you have one life and five lives to control process, chug away. And you typically say well, you know, better to save five. Even at the expense of one. But for the bridge case, emotions light up. It's not just a cold blooded calculation one and five, but also this gut feeling. And the gut feeling lights up for green. Not because of any principle or structure. It's, it's the idea that this visceral feeling of putting your hands on somebody and shoving, causes emotional response. That's what's driving it.

It has nothing to do with the doctrine of double effect, or anything like that. It's an emotional response to the physicality of pushing somebody to his death.

We also know from other research that people can be influenced in their choices on the switch case and a bridge case by fiddling with their emotions in various ways. So my favorite example of this is, how do you make people more likely to say it's okay to push the man off the bridge? 

Show them something funny.

So they, so, the researchers found some very funny clips from Saturday Night Live, they showed em to people, people laughed, and then they asked bridge case. And they said, now people said, yeah, I'll push em. Suggesting that there, that, that there aren't these abstract emotion, sorry, the abstract rational principles guiding our choices here, but rather, gut feelings played more of a role.

## 1.7: The Big Questions

Is Hume right? Is, is, is really more reasoning just a slave of the passions? What's the proper relationship between emotion and reason in everyday moral life? Is everything emotional? Does reason play any important role?

Emotion plainly affects our morality. But I want to try also persuade you that reason, cold blooded rational deliberation, thinking things through also affects our moral lives.

Second big question is where do morals come from? So, how much of our moral judgments we've
been talking about, are intuitions about trolley problems and murder and rape and, and masturbation and selling your body organs and eating dogs and so on?

How much of this is explained by evolution, so part of our brain structured by our, our evolutionary history, how much of it is explained by personal, individual experience, how much varies from culture to culture, and how much of it is just personal choice?

And then the third question, the big question maybe, is can scientific inquiry - including psychological inquiry - help us with morality? Can it help us be better people?

Some people say it is a fallacy to go from the way the world is, which is what science studies, to the way the world ought to be, which is the proper domain of ethics. But things might be more complicated than that, and we're going to struggle with these questions, throughout.

And for the reading, for the assignments for this week you're supposed to watch their TED talks where they present their view in detail. What I want to do here is, as a way to introduce it, present a snippet from each of their talks.

And what I like about, about this is they're each articulate proponents of a perspective on morality, but the perspectives are quite different. They are, they are, are as close to opposites as you could find. 

Sam Harris argues there's object the facts about the moral landscape. And it, what makes it a moral landscape is, the space has hills where, where things are good, and valleys where things are bad. And there are objective facts. And he argues that many popular moral (mostly religious) views - are just wrong. They're as wrong about morality as they are about, you know, cosmology.

>> When talking about morality, we value differences of opinion in a way that we don't in any other area of our lives. The Dalai Lama thinks that helping other human beings is an integral component of human happiness. Ted Bundy was very fond of abducting and raping and torturing and killing young So we appear to have a genuine difference
of opinion about how to profitably use
one's time.

>> Most western intellectuals look at this situation and say, well there's nothing for the Dalai Lama to be really right about, really right about. Or for Ted Bundy to be really wrong about. That admits of a, of a real argument. That, that, that, that potentially falls within the purview of science.

> Well, you know, that he's like chocolate, he likes vanilla there's, there's no, there's nothing that one should be able to say to the other, that should persuade the other.

> Now notice that we don't do this in science. Whenever we are talking about facts, certain opinions must be excluded. Then, that is what it is to have a domain of expertise. That is what it is for knowledge to count. 

> How have we convinced ourselves that in the moral sphere, there is no such thing as moral expertise? Or moral talent? Or moral genius, even? How have we convinced ourselves that every opinion has to count? How have we convinced ourselves that, that every culture has a point of view on these subjects worth considering? Does, does the Taliban have a point of view on physics that is worth considering? No.

> How, how is there ignorance, how is their ignorance, how is their ignorance any less obvious on the subject of human well being?

> So, so this I, I think is what the world needs now. It needs people like ourselves to admit that there are right and wrong answers to questions of human flourishing. And morality relates to that domain of facts. It is possible, for individuals, and even for whole cultures to care about the wrong things. Just admitting this, will transform our discourse about morality.

> We live in a world in which, the boundaries between nations mean less and less, and they will one day mean nothing. We live in a world filled with destructive technology, and this technology cannot be uninvented. It, it will always be easier to break things than to fix them.

> It seems to me, therefore, patently obvious that we can no more, respect and tolerate vast differences in, in notions of human well being than we can respect or tolerate vast difference in the notions about how disease spreads. Or in the, in the safety standards of buildings and airplanes. We simply must converge on the answers we give to the most important questions in human life.

> And to do that, we have to admit that these questions have answers. Thank you very much.

So Jonathan Haidt in contrast has a very different perspective. Haidt emphasizes a respect for pluralism. In particular, he argues that many moral frameworks including common ones that are grounded in religion, deserve respect.

> You have the markings of, of Vishnu on the left, so we could think of Vishnu as the
conservative god. You have the markings of Shiva, on the right. Shiva is the liberal god, and they work together.

> You find the same thing in Buddhism. These two stanzas contain I think the deepest insights that have ever been attained, into moral psychology.

> "From the Zen master Seng-ts'an. If you want the trust to stand clear before you, never be for or against. The struggle between for and against is the mind's worst disease."

> Well, if you take the greatest insights from ancient Asian philosophies and religions and you combine them with the latest research on moral psychology, I think you'd come to these conclusions. That our righteous minds were designed by evolution to unite us into teams, to divide us against other teams, and then to blind us to the truth.

> So, what should you do? Am I telling you to not strive? Am I telling you to embrace Seng-ts'an and stop?  No, absolutely not. I'm not saying that. This is an amazing group of people, who are doing so much, using so much of their talent, their brilliance, their energy, their money to make the world a better place, to fight, to fight wrongs to, to solve problems. But as you can't just go charging in, saying you're wrong and I'm right. because as we just heard, everybody thinks they are right.

> A lot of the problems we have to solve are problems that require to change other people. And if you want to change other people, the much better way to do it is to first understand who we are. Understand our moral psychology, understand that we all think we're right, and then step out. Step out of the moral matrix, just try to see it as, as a struggle playing out in which everybody does think they're right. And everybody at least has some reasons, even if you disagree with them, everybody has some reasons for what they're doing.

But what again, what I hope to do is, as we talk more and more about the science of morality, talk more about theories, talk more about data. We'll be in a better position, all of us, to better decide, what's the right answer to these big and these very important questions.

## Readings 1.1: The Moral Instinct, Steven Pinker

For most people, Mother Theresea > Bill Gates > Norman Borlaug for who is most admirable. But Borlaug used the agriculture revolution and is credited with saving a billion lives, Gates fights against malaria and diarrhea, and Mother Teresa's patrons were offered prayer but harsh conditions and primitive medical care.

Our heads can be turned by an aura of sanctity, distracting us from a more objective recokning of the actions that make people suffer or flourish.

#### The Moralization Switch

Moralization is a psychological state that can be turned on and off like a switch, and when it is on, a distinctive mind-set commandeers our thinking. This is the mind-set that makes us deem actions immoral (“killing is wrong”), rather than merely disagreeable (“I hate brussels sprouts”), unfashionable (“bell-bottoms are out”) or imprudent (“don’t scratch mosquito bites”).

The rules it invokes are felt to be universal. Prohibiting rape/murder is universal, while hating brussel sprouts is not.

People feel that those who commit immoral acts desever to be punished. "They can't get away with it." "The infliction of cruelty with a good conscience is a delight to moralists — that is why they invented hell." - Bertrand Russell

Moral vegetarians are more likely to treat meat as a contaminant as opposed to health vegetarians. They are more likely to think that other people ought to be vegetarians, more likely to imbue their dietary habits with other virtues, like believing that meat avoidance makes people less aggressive and bestial.

Much of our recent social history, including the culture wars between liberals and conservatives, consists of the moralization or amoralization of particular kinds of behavior. Even when people agree that an outcome is desirable, they may disagree on whether it should be treated as a matter of preference and prudence or as a matter of sin and virtue. When secondhand smoke was discovered, smoking is now treated as immoral: images of people smoking are censored and entities touched by smoke are felt to be contaminated.

At the same time, many behaviors have been amoralized: divorce, illegitimacy, being a working mother, marijuana use and homosexuality. Many afflictions have been reassigned from payback for bad choices to unlucky misfortunes. There used to be people called “bums” and “tramps”; today they are “homeless.” Drug addiction is a “disease”; syphilis was rebranded from the price of wanton behavior to a “sexually transmitted disease” and more recently a “sexually transmitted infection.”

This wave of amoralization has led the cultural right to lament that morality itself is under assault, as we see in the group that anointed itself the Moral Majority. In fact there seems to be a Law of Conservation of Moralization, so that as old behaviors are taken out of the moralized column, new ones are added to it. Dozens of things that past generations treated as practical matters are now ethical battlegrounds, including disposable diapers, I.Q. tests, poultry farms, Barbie dolls and research on breast cancer. Food alone has become a minefield, with critics sermonizing about the size of sodas, the chemistry of fat, the freedom of chickens, the price of coffee beans, the species of fish and now the distance the food has traveled from farm to plate.

Many of these moralizations, like the assault on smoking, may be understood as practical tactics to reduce some recently identified harm. But whether an activity flips our mental switches to the “moral” setting isn’t just a matter of how much harm it does. We don’t show contempt to the man who fails to change the batteries in his smoke alarms or takes his family on a driving vacation, both of which multiply the risk they will die in an accident. Driving a gas-guzzling Hummer is reprehensible, but driving a gas-guzzling old Volvo is not; eating a Big Mac is unconscionable, but not imported cheese or crème brûlée. The reason for these double standards is obvious: people tend to align their moralization with their own lifestyles.

#### A Universal Morality?

The stirrings of morality emerge early in childhood. Toddlers spontaneously offer toys and help to others and try to comfort people they see in distress. And according to the psychologists Elliot Turiel and Judith Smetana, preschoolers have an inkling of the difference between societal conventions and moral principles. Four-year-olds say that it is not O.K. to wear pajamas to school (a convention) and also not O.K. to hit a little girl for no reason (a moral principle). But when asked whether these actions would be O.K. if the teacher allowed them, most of the children said that wearing pajamas would now be fine but that hitting a little girl would still not be.

Though no one has identified genes for morality, there is circumstantial evidence they exist. The character traits called “conscientiousness” and “agreeableness” are far more correlated in identical twins separated at birth (who share their genes but not their environment) than in adoptive siblings raised together (who share their environment but not their genes). People given diagnoses of “antisocial personality disorder” or “psychopathy” show signs of morality blindness from the time they are children. They bully younger children, torture animals, habitually lie and seem incapable of empathy or remorse, often despite normal family backgrounds. Some of these children grow up into the monsters who bilk elderly people out of their savings, rape a succession of women or shoot convenience-store clerks lying on the floor during a robbery.

Though psychopathy probably comes from a genetic predisposition, a milder version can be caused by damage to frontal regions of the brain (including the areas that inhibit intact people from throwing the hypothetical fat man off the bridge). The neuroscientists Hanna and Antonio Damasio and their colleagues found that some children who sustain severe injuries to their frontal lobes can grow up into callous and irresponsible adults, despite normal intelligence. They lie, steal, ignore punishment, endanger their own children and can’t think through even the simplest moral dilemmas, like what two people should do if they disagreed on which TV channel to watch or whether a man ought to steal a drug to save his dying wife.

#### The Varieties of Moral Experience

The exact number of themes depends on whether you’re a lumper or a splitter, but Haidt counts five — harm, fairness, community (or group loyalty), authority and purity — and suggests that they are the primary colors of our moral sense. Not only do they keep reappearing in cross-cultural surveys, but each one tugs on the moral intuitions of people in our own culture. Haidt asks us to consider how much money someone would have to pay us to do hypothetical acts like the following:

Stick a pin into your palm.

Stick a pin into the palm of a child you don’t know. (Harm.)

Accept a wide-screen TV from a friend who received it at no charge because of a computer error.

Accept a wide-screen TV from a friend who received it from a thief who had stolen it from a wealthy family. (Fairness.)

Say something bad about your nation (which you don’t believe) on a talk-radio show in your nation.

Say something bad about your nation (which you don’t believe) on a talk-radio show in a foreign nation. (Community.)

Slap a friend in the face, with his permission, as part of a comedy skit.

Slap your minister in the face, with his permission, as part of a comedy skit. (Authority.)

Attend a performance-art piece in which the actors act like idiots for 30 minutes, including flubbing simple problems and falling down on stage.

Attend a performance-art piece in which the actors act like animals for 30 minutes, including crawling around naked and urinating on stage. (Purity.)

In each pair, the second action feels far more repugnant. Most of the moral illusions we have visited come from an unwarranted intrusion of one of the moral spheres into our judgments. A violation of community led people to frown on using an old flag to clean a bathroom. Violations of purity repelled the people who judged the morality of consensual incest and prevented the moral vegetarians and nonsmokers from tolerating the slightest trace of a vile contaminant. At the other end of the scale, displays of extreme purity lead people to venerate religious leaders who dress in white and affect an aura of chastity and asceticism.

#### The Genealogy of Morals

The five spheres are good candidates for a periodic table of the moral sense not only because they are ubiquitous but also because they appear to have deep evolutionary roots. The impulse to avoid harm, which gives trolley ponderers the willies when they consider throwing a man off a bridge, can also be found in rhesus monkeys, who go hungry rather than pull a chain that delivers food to them and a shock to another monkey. Respect for authority is clearly related to the pecking orders of dominance and appeasement that are widespread in the animal kingdom. The purity-defilement contrast taps the emotion of disgust that is triggered by potential disease vectors like bodily effluvia, decaying flesh and unconventional forms of meat, and by risky sexual practices like incest.

The other two moralized spheres match up with the classic examples of how altruism can evolve that were worked out by sociobiologists in the 1960s and 1970s and made famous by Richard Dawkins in his book “The Selfish Gene.” Fairness is very close to what scientists call reciprocal altruism, where a willingness to be nice to others can evolve as long as the favor helps the recipient more than it costs the giver and the recipient returns the favor when fortunes reverse. The analysis makes it sound as if reciprocal altruism comes out of a robotlike calculation, but in fact Robert Trivers, the biologist who devised the theory, argued that it is implemented in the brain as a suite of moral emotions. Sympathy prompts a person to offer the first favor, particularly to someone in need for whom it would go the furthest. Anger protects a person against cheaters who accept a favor without reciprocating, by impelling him to punish the ingrate or sever the relationship. Gratitude impels a beneficiary to reward those who helped him in the past. Guilt prompts a cheater in danger of being found out to repair the relationship by redressing the misdeed and advertising that he will behave better in the future (consistent with Mencken’s definition of conscience as “the inner voice which warns us that someone might be looking”). Many experiments on who helps whom, who likes whom, who punishes whom and who feels guilty about what have confirmed these predictions.

Community, the very different emotion that prompts people to share and sacrifice without an expectation of payback, may be rooted in nepotistic altruism, the empathy and solidarity we feel toward our relatives (and which evolved because any gene that pushed an organism to aid a relative would have helped copies of itself sitting inside that relative). In humans, of course, communal feelings can be lavished on nonrelatives as well. Sometimes it pays people (in an evolutionary sense) to love their companions because their interests are yoked, like spouses with common children, in-laws with common relatives, friends with common tastes or allies with common enemies. And sometimes it doesn’t pay them at all, but their kinship-detectors have been tricked into treating their groupmates as if they were relatives by tactics like kinship metaphors (blood brothers, fraternities, the fatherland), origin myths, communal meals and other bonding rituals.

#### Juggling the Spheres

America - harm and fairness. Japan - community (fear of nonconfromity). Hindus/Jews - purity (dietary restrictions). Muslims - authority (insulting the prophet.) West hates nepotism/cronyism, but in other parts of the world, family is more important than strangers.

#### Is Nothing Sacred?

And “morally corrosive” is exactly the term that some critics would apply to the new science of the moral sense. The attempt to dissect our moral intuitions can look like an attempt to debunk them. In reality, none of these fears are warranted, and it’s important to see why not. 

“Selfish” genes are perfectly compatible with selfless organisms, because a gene’s metaphorical goal of selfishly replicating itself can be implemented by wiring up the brain of the organism to do unselfish things, like being nice to relatives or doing good deeds for needy strangers.

Nor does reciprocal altruism — the evolutionary rationale behind fairness — imply that people do good deeds in the cynical expectation of repayment down the line.

In his classic 1971 article, Trivers, the biologist, showed how natural selection could push in the direction of true selflessness. The emergence of tit-for-tat reciprocity, which lets organisms trade favors without being cheated, is just a first step. A favor-giver not only has to avoid blatant cheaters (those who would accept a favor but not return it) but also prefer generous reciprocators (those who return the biggest favor they can afford) over stingy ones (those who return the smallest favor they can get away with). Since it’s good to be chosen as a recipient of favors, a competition arises to be the most generous partner around. More accurately, a competition arises to appear to be the most generous partner around, since the favor-giver can’t literally read minds or see into the future. A reputation for fairness and generosity becomes an asset.

Now this just sets up a competition for potential beneficiaries to inflate their reputations without making the sacrifices to back them up. But it also pressures the favor-giver to develop ever-more-sensitive radar to distinguish the genuinely generous partners from the hypocrites. This arms race will eventually reach a logical conclusion. The most effective way to seem generous and fair, under harsh scrutiny, is to be generous and fair. In the long run, then, reputation can be secured only by commitment. At least some agents evolve to be genuinely high-minded and self-sacrificing — they are moral not because of what it brings them but because that’s the kind of people they are.

Of course, a theory that predicted that everyone always sacrificed themselves for another’s good would be as preposterous as a theory that predicted that no one ever did. Alongside the niches for saints there are niches for more grudging reciprocators, who attract fewer and poorer partners but don’t make the sacrifices necessary for a sterling reputation. And both may coexist with outright cheaters, who exploit the unwary in one-shot encounters. An ecosystem of niches, each with a distinct strategy, can evolve when the payoff of each strategy depends on how many players are playing the other strategies. The human social environment does have its share of generous, grudging and crooked characters, and the genetic variation in personality seems to bear the fingerprints of this evolutionary process.

#### Is Morality a Figment?

So a biological understanding of the moral sense does not entail that people are calculating maximizers of their genes or self-interest. But where does it leave the concept of morality itself?

Here is the worry. The scientific outlook has taught us that some parts of our subjective experience are products of our biological makeup and have no objective counterpart in the world. The qualitative difference between red and green, the tastiness of fruit and foulness of carrion, the scariness of heights and prettiness of flowers are design features of our common nervous system, and if our species had evolved in a different ecosystem or if we were missing a few genes, our reactions could go the other way. Now, if the distinction between right and wrong is also a product of brain wiring, why should we believe it is any more real than the distinction between red and green? And if it is just a collective hallucination, how could we argue that evils like genocide and slavery are wrong for everyone, rather than just distasteful to us?

Putting God in charge of morality is one way to solve the problem, of course, but Plato made short work of it 2,400 years ago. Does God have a good reason for designating certain acts as moral and others as immoral? If not — if his dictates are divine whims — why should we take them seriously? Suppose that God commanded us to torture a child. Would that make it all right, or would some other standard give us reasons to resist? And if, on the other hand, God was forced by moral reasons to issue some dictates and not others — if a command to torture a child was never an option — then why not appeal to those reasons directly?

This throws us back to wondering where those reasons could come from, if they are more than just figments of our brains. They certainly aren’t in the physical world like wavelength or mass. The only other option is that moral truths exist in some abstract Platonic realm, there for us to discover, perhaps in the same way that mathematical truths (according to most mathematicians) are there for us to discover. On this analogy, we are born with a rudimentary concept of number, but as soon as we build on it with formal mathematical reasoning, the nature of mathematical reality forces us to discover some truths and not others. (No one who understands the concept of two, the concept of four and the concept of addition can come to any conclusion but that 2 + 2 = 4.) Perhaps we are born with a rudimentary moral sense, and as soon as we build on it with moral reasoning, the nature of moral reality forces us to some conclusions but not others.

Moral realism, as this idea is called, is too rich for many philosophers’ blood. Yet a diluted version of the idea — if not a list of cosmically inscribed Thou-Shalts, then at least a few If-Thens — is not crazy. Two features of reality point any rational, self-preserving social agent in a moral direction. And they could provide a benchmark for determining when the judgments of our moral sense are aligned with morality itself.

One is the prevalence of nonzero-sum games. In many arenas of life, two parties are objectively better off if they both act in a nonselfish way than if each of them acts selfishly. You and I are both better off if we share our surpluses, rescue each other’s children in danger and refrain from shooting at each other, compared with hoarding our surpluses while they rot, letting the other’s child drown while we file our nails or feuding like the Hatfields and McCoys. Granted, I might be a bit better off if I acted selfishly at your expense and you played the sucker, but the same is true for you with me, so if each of us tried for these advantages, we’d both end up worse off. Any neutral observer, and you and I if we could talk it over rationally, would have to conclude that the state we should aim for is the one in which we both are unselfish. These spreadsheet projections are not quirks of brain wiring, nor are they dictated by a supernatural power; they are in the nature of things.

The other external support for morality is a feature of rationality itself: that it cannot depend on the egocentric vantage point of the reasoner. If I appeal to you to do anything that affects me — to get off my foot, or tell me the time or not run me over with your car — then I can’t do it in a way that privileges my interests over yours (say, retaining my right to run you over with my car) if I want you to take me seriously. Unless I am Galactic Overlord, I have to state my case in a way that would force me to treat you in kind. I can’t act as if my interests are special just because I’m me and you’re not, any more than I can persuade you that the spot I am standing on is a special place in the universe just because I happen to be standing on it.

Not coincidentally, the core of this idea — the interchangeability of perspectives — keeps reappearing in history’s best-thought-through moral philosophies, including the Golden Rule (itself discovered many times); Spinoza’s Viewpoint of Eternity; the Social Contract of Hobbes, Rousseau and Locke; Kant’s Categorical Imperative; and Rawls’s Veil of Ignorance. It also underlies Peter Singer’s theory of the Expanding Circle — the optimistic proposal that our moral sense, though shaped by evolution to overvalue self, kin and clan, can propel us on a path of moral progress, as our reasoning forces us to generalize it to larger and larger circles of sentient beings.

Doing Better by Knowing Ourselves

Morality, then, is still something larger than our inherited moral sense, and the new science of the moral sense does not make moral reasoning and conviction obsolete. At the same time, its implications for our moral universe are profound.

At the very least, the science tells us that even when our adversaries’ agenda is most baffling, they may not be amoral psychopaths but in the throes of a moral mind-set that appears to them to be every bit as mandatory and universal as ours does to us. Of course, some adversaries really are psychopaths, and others are so poisoned by a punitive moralization that they are beyond the pale of reason. (The actor Will Smith had many historians on his side when he recently speculated to the press that Hitler thought he was acting morally.) But in any conflict in which a meeting of the minds is not completely hopeless, a recognition that the other guy is acting from moral rather than venal reasons can be a first patch of common ground. One side can acknowledge the other’s concern for community or stability or fairness or dignity, even while arguing that some other value should trump it in that instance. With affirmative action, for example, the opponents can be seen as arguing from a sense of fairness, not racism, and the defenders can be seen as acting from a concern with community, not bureaucratic power. Liberals can ratify conservatives’ concern with families while noting that gay marriage is perfectly consistent with that concern.

The science of the moral sense also alerts us to ways in which our psychological makeup can get in the way of our arriving at the most defensible moral conclusions. The moral sense, we are learning, is as vulnerable to illusions as the other senses. It is apt to confuse morality per se with purity, status and conformity. It tends to reframe practical problems as moral crusades and thus see their solution in punitive aggression. It imposes taboos that make certain ideas indiscussible. And it has the nasty habit of always putting the self on the side of the angels.

Though wise people have long reflected on how we can be blinded by our own sanctimony, our public discourse still fails to discount it appropriately. In the worst cases, the thoughtlessness of our brute intuitions can be celebrated as a virtue. In his influential essay “The Wisdom of Repugnance,” Leon Kass, former chair of the President’s Council on Bioethics, argued that we should disregard reason when it comes to cloning and other biomedical technologies and go with our gut: “We are repelled by the prospect of cloning human beings . . . because we intuit and feel, immediately and without argument, the violation of things that we rightfully hold dear. . . . In this age in which everything is held to be permissible so long as it is freely done . . . repugnance may be the only voice left that speaks up to defend the central core of our humanity. Shallow are the souls that have forgotten how to shudder.”

There are, of course, good reasons to regulate human cloning, but the shudder test is not one of them. People have shuddered at all kinds of morally irrelevant violations of purity in their culture: touching an untouchable, drinking from the same water fountain as a Negro, allowing Jewish blood to mix with Aryan blood, tolerating sodomy between consenting men. And if our ancestors’ repugnance had carried the day, we never would have had autopsies, vaccinations, blood transfusions, artificial insemination, organ transplants and in vitro fertilization, all of which were denounced as immoral when they were new.

There are many other issues for which we are too quick to hit the moralization button and look for villains rather than bug fixes. What should we do when a hospital patient is killed by a nurse who administers the wrong drug in a patient’s intravenous line? Should we make it easier to sue the hospital for damages? Or should we redesign the IV fittings so that it’s physically impossible to connect the wrong bottle to the line?

And nowhere is moralization more of a hazard than in our greatest global challenge. The threat of human-induced climate change has become the occasion for a moralistic revival meeting. In many discussions, the cause of climate change is overindulgence (too many S.U.V.’s) and defilement (sullying the atmosphere), and the solution is temperance (conservation) and expiation (buying carbon offset coupons). Yet the experts agree that these numbers don’t add up: even if every last American became conscientious about his or her carbon emissions, the effects on climate change would be trifling, if for no other reason than that two billion Indians and Chinese are unlikely to copy our born-again abstemiousness. Though voluntary conservation may be one wedge in an effective carbon-reduction pie, the other wedges will have to be morally boring, like a carbon tax and new energy technologies, or even taboo, like nuclear power and deliberate manipulation of the ocean and atmosphere. Our habit of moralizing problems, merging them with intuitions of purity and contamination, and resting content when we feel the right feelings, can get in the way of doing the right thing.

Far from debunking morality, then, the science of the moral sense can advance it, by allowing us to see through the illusions that evolution and culture have saddled us with and to focus on goals we can share and defend. As Anton Chekhov wrote, “Man will become better when you show him what he is like.”

## Week 1 Office Hours

I'm actually personal friends with both of them. They both blurbed my book, Just Babies. And I have sympathies intellectual sympathies to different extents with, with both of them. But it's fair to say that, that is Harris that generates the most heat, because Harris is very explicit.

His view is, that some, the way some religions do it, actually the way all religions do it, possible exception of Buddhism, and the way some cultures do it, live their lives, treat people is just wrong. And when you say that kind of thing, it's going to generate some heat. It is, it is, nobody likes to hear that, the way you do in your country is morally wrong and morally mistaken in how you're living your lives. So I'm not surprised that people are, are bothered by Harris. Why, perhaps offended by Harris. I, I I don't mind it. I think it shows people are, I think, I think people if you have certain issues you should be offended by Harris. But, he's a smart enough scholar and, and, and is gifted at clearly articulating an interesting and important view, that I had to include him. And I'm very happy I did.

Harris is very clearly a consequentalist, a utilitarian actually. He argues that there's a landscape of pain and pleasure. __And that you judge a society by how well it, it, it, it places people on that landscape.__ How it maximizes happiness. In some way, Sam Harris is the most purest incarnation of Jeremy Bentham. However, Harris's style of argument is certainty. Is is sort of declarative and, and argumentative style. You could easily strike somebody as almost Contian, as almost categorical. Drawing sharp lines and so on and that is how he, he makes his arguments. It's how it's, it, it's, it's his rhetorical style but he's pure consequentialist. 

So when Harris says, you guys where, where guys could be Christians. Or Muslims. He says you guys are doing it wrong. What he means is, you're not violating some abstract principle. Rather, you're moral rules are causing suffering. The way you're living your life causes suffering. Causes pain without the accompaniment of pleasure. Does not allow people to flourish. Doesn't allow people to fulfill their lives. And that's consequentialism through and through.

So we'll be reading more, more of Haidt in the course. We'll be reading a chapter, a chapter of his on politics. And Haidt is definitely more pluralist than Harris. Haidt thinks there are many ways to build a moral life here, many different moral values to be maximized, not all of them being consequentialist. And he has more respect for them. He has more respect for a society that tries to maximize values like community purity, divinity, all things that Harris has very little patience for. So he's a pluralist. 

But it's not correct I think to say that, that for Haidt everything goes. In particular, Haidt would say some moral views are just flat wrong. The views he respects, are those that have a long history. And his logic, I think, is that if there's been a moral view that's been around for a long time, centuries, the view has in some way proven itself worthy of respect. It proves that you would have if it's, we're going to flourish in society over hundreds, maybe thousands of years, Haidt's intuition is this is doing something for them and, and we should show some respect for that view. It's fundamentally a conservative argument, I think its a good conservative argument which is, you shouldn't be so quick to reject things that have been around for a long time, because the fact that they have been around for a long time might suggest that they have more utility. 

I think that virtue ethicists have a good point when they say, you know, we should focus instead on how to live one's life. What sort of moral character we should be. so, so it might be a wrong turn. To just put so much focus on what would you do if there's a runaway trolley and there's this and there's that and you can do this and that because in some way that is part of morality. But another part of morality is how to be a good mother, a good father, a good, good son, good daughter, good friend, a good colleague. Not in terms of, sort of, this dilemma, should you do X or Y? And to some extent I think it's because certainly as psychologists, we love boiling things down to, sort of, things where you say, okay what's the right answer, this or this. Then we test 1,000 people and we do statistics and everything like that. 

But what if morality isn't best appreciated that way. What if morality isn't a series of dilemmas or problems but more sort of a way of the kind of person you are and how you live your life. What it is to be a good friend can't be broken down into sort of a series of, do you do this or that, do you do this or that. You know it's, it's, it's not that kind of thing. It's, it's how you deal with people. How you, how you, you, you spend your time. How you, how you think about things. 

If I'm standing near a trolley and, you know, something's going to happen. Some people are going to be killed. Maybe the right thing to do is just not to do anything, because then I won't be responsible for some of the deaths. For any deaths. What do you think about that answer? What do you think of that answer? What would you do? So, so what do you think the right answer is? If not the, not the man on the bridge, but there's a, a runaway trolley and there's a switch, and if, if you throw the switch, it will get diverted from the five, and kill one person. Not asking now what the right thing to do is, what do you think you would do? 

But psychologically there's a big difference between an act and an omission and were not typically held as responsible for omissions. If I live in a big city and there's a homeless person in front of my building and I do nothing to help them and then they, they starve to death or they freeze in the winter. Did I kill them? Well, we're not abs, I, the police won't come to me and arrest me for murder. If I went down and hit him on the head with a hammer, then they'd arrest me. So we have this huge sense of an act versus an omission and this is very different from con, consequentialists say it shouldn't matter. 
But it does matter. And so I, I, I, I understand where it's coming from, the feeling you should do nothing. Because if you do nothing you have clean hands in a certain way. While as soon as you do something, you're responsible for the death that your act would cause. I think moral philosophers like Bentham or Peter Singer who we'll talk about in this week coming up would say that's mistaken, but it feels right. And so I have some sort of appreciation for it. 

And I'm absolutely fascinated by disgust and it's moral effects and so that question's [UNKNOWN] thought of a lot. And, I think the answer is yes. And I think the answer is yes in an everyday sense of disgust. So, take a new parent and a baby and you have to clean up it's, it's diaper or it's vomit and everything. Which new parents spend most of their time doing. And at first it's really gross, but you get used to it. You just get used to it. You, you, it doesn't bother you as much. You learn to, you learn to not focus on it. I would change my kids' diapers and after a while it wouldn't bother me at all. So, I could, could figure out how to do it. I never changed another kid's diaper. I tried it it's awful. But you know you get, you get used to it. And I think it's the same thing for I know we have people who posted, we have some nurses who posted, talking about how you, you get, you get used to it. 

But there's, there's also, I think, a more interesting answer which is I think to some extent other emotions conquer disgust. So there's a literature on, on lust, so so, so I'm not, don't worry, I'm not going to get graphic, but there's, but, but, people who are in sexual passion will often do things and engage in things that would be disgusting if they weren't. 

There's also love. I think that the, the, the treatment you give to your child, to an elderly parent, to a sick friend. If you love somebody, they cease to be disgusting to you. And this is why you have these stories of these saints. Who, who do engage in acts that, that, that would seem to be disgusting to many. And I think that these are meant to illustrate that these saints are filled with infinite love, even to strangers. Great. 

So Kant argues that you should never use never treat people as a means to an end, but always treat them as an end in them, in themselves. Doesn't psychology research treat people as a means? 

Yeah, yeah. It's, it's, it's true and, and I think some people are a little bit upset at this or a lot upset at this. So, there are some experiments including experiments we're going to talk about later on in the course that are, that we would never nowadays. They were done 20, 30, 40 years ago. And they are unethical. They're unethical because they they don't take people's dignity and consent into account because they, they do cruel deceptions and so on. I think we've learned a lot from them, but I think on balance we shouldn't have done them. 

The best interpretation of Kant I think, is that people shouldn't be only a means. That although we might interact with them. We might interact with them from the standpoint of, of getting something from them, getting from this place to that place, getting a meal, buying a product. We should also acknowledge that they're people and treat them with respect and, and, and, and with appreciation for the fact that they're people. 

And so, as a psychologist, I try to do that as well. So, when I do an experiment with an adult, I try to get the adult's consent. I don't want any unnecessary deception. When the experiment is over I, I, I explain to them what we did and so on. And and so in that way I think we, we avoid that worry. 

# Week 2

## 2.1: Caring About Others

Now empathy is often regarded as the source of compassion or source of all morality. And we'll evaluate that claim looking at what empathy is, how it works? What it could do for us? And what it can't do for us? Now, as a starting point, I want you to imagine a perfect psychopath. We are going to real psychopaths pretty soon, but now talk about an imaginary psychopath. 

#### Imaginary Psychopath

This imaginary psychopath is highly intelligent, has a normal set of emotions and desires, but totally lacks compassion, totally lacks fellow feeling. Other people do not matter to him. So, although he's not a sadist, when he wants something he'll try to get it, without any regard for other people's feelings. If he wants money or sex or power, he'll just try to get it, and he doesn't care who he hurts along the way. If the cat is in front of him and he's bored and he feels like strangling the cat, he'll strangle the cat. 

Now, suppose you had this perfect psychopath in front of you, and you wanted to take it upon yourself to convince him to be a good person. You wanted to argue with him that he shouldn't be this kind of person. So you started off by saying look, you know when you harm people, when you do things to people and they hate it, and it hurts them. And he says yeah. And he says well how would you feel if other people did that to you. And he would answer well I, I would hate that and then you say so do you recognize the symetry. 

And he would respond and say, sure, I'm not an idiot, I'm a highly intelligent psychopath. ___I recognize that the two are a lot alike. I just don't care.___ And then you could throw some philosophy at him. So you could talk about a consequentialist like Bentham, who would argue that the right thing to do is to increase the sum of pleasure in the world. And you say to him, look, you, look at your actions, you're decreasing the sum of pleasure. You're increasing the amount of pain in the world. And he could say, I don't care. I understand I'm making the world worse. I just don't care. You could talk about deontological philosophers like Immanuel Kant and tell him about the categorical imperative and he could say, I understand the categorical comparative. And remember, I'm a smart guy. I just don't care. I don't care if I make the world worst. I don't care if my acts are not the sort of acts one would want to extent universally. 

The only way you can get the psychopath to act in a decent way is through threats of punishment or reward. And, you know, this is one reason why we have prisons. __It's one reason why we have, we have fines, some societies executions, because there're some proportion of people in the world where the only way they will act decently towards other people.__ The only way other people's feelings and emotions will count is if they know that if they don't act that way they themselves are going to be hurt. They are going to have their money taken away from them. They are going to be put into a cage. They are going to be killed. 

Now, this is just a way of introducing an idea argued by David Hume and other philosophers that In order to get morality off the ground, in order to be motivated to do good things and not bad things, you need to have some spark of feelings. __You need to have other people have to matter to you. If not, you're no better then the psychopath.__ And we can take this insight and turn it around. And say, look, since we have morality, since most people listen to this. Do have a sense of right and wrong. This means that we must have had some spark of compassion, some of these feelings. We are not inherently psychopaths, and this makes morality possible.

Now, the point, the idea that people have fundamentally kind thoughts towards others, that would regard others with some degree of caring and compassion, is an old one. And it was articulated, I think, most clearly by Adam Smith in, in, in his writings in the 1700s. Now, some of you may know Adam Smith as the founder of modern economics. He wrote this classic book, an inquiry into the, wealth of nations, into nature and cause of wealth of nations. which, in which he argued he defended in part a somewhat free market. He defended the idea that self-interested agents working just for their own benefit can in some societies have things work that things end up for the benefit of everybody. goodness, emerges as through the invisible hand as an emergent property of self-interest and greed. 

But it's easy to misread this as saying that Adam Smith himself thought people were greedy and self-serving. And nothing could be further from the true. So wealth of nations was Adam Smith's second book. His first book which he said was his finest book, was The Theory of Moral Sentiments. And this is a brilliant discussion of our natural inclinations towards sympathy, towards kindness, sometimes towards punishment and justice and vengeance. And he begins this book with a couple of, a few sentences I think eloquently capture a lot about human nature. 

So, he writes. However selfish soever man may be supposed, there are evidently some principles in his nature, which interest him in the fortune of others, and render their happiness necessary to him. That we often derive sorrow from the sorrow of others, is a matter of fact too obvious to require any instances to prove it. So Smith says he doesn't need any examples, and I am not going to provide any examples. I'll ask you to provide your own. So imagine, imagine a person you love in the world, could be your, your child, your boyfriend, girlfriend, husband, wife, your best friend, your, your, there must be somebody. And imagine that person in sorrow, imagine that person is suffering. How does that make you feel? Now, if your answer is meh, I'm fine. Then you're a psychopath, then, then you're one of the small proportion of people who, who may well lack fellow feeling. 

But most of us would say, wow, I don't want that to happen. I don't want somebody I care for to suffer. I want that suffering to go away. And, and so this seems to be sort of a fundamental aspect of ourselves. Now one can reasonably ask, and is a, I think an extremly interesting scientific question, where does this come from? Why do we care about others? What happens to us or has happened to us that causes us to care about others? 

And one common enough view is that we're not born that way. We're born entirely cold blooded. But it's not an idea that I believe is right. I think that right now, enough, enough of, there is by now, enough of a body of evidence from studies and observations of babies and young children, to suggest that, on some degree compassion shows up early. 

So, one finding for instance is a baby's crying. So, how do you make a baby cry? Well, there's a lot of ways to do this. But one way to do it which is pretty powerful, is expose the baby to the cries of other babies. The baby will hear the sound of other babies and then start to cry, him or herself. Now some very cynical psychologists have said, well that doesn't show anything. Maybe babies are so stupid that they hear the sounds of other babies crying, they think they themselves are crying, this panics them, so they cry some more. But then even more clever psychologists did another study, where they expose babies to the sound of crying babies and these were tape recordings, either of their own cries or other babies cries. And they find that babies get upset more at the sound of their own cries than at the cries of others, suggesting it really is some sort of outer directed feeling. And this is supported in different ways. We know that babies when they see someone else suffering as soon as they're able to might pat and soothe the other person to try to make them feel better. And we know that toddlers will start to share and help those around them, particularly those they are familiar with and those that they care about such as their siblings and, and, and, and maybe their friends. It's not it's hard to disagree then, with Adam Smith's claim that some compassion, some fellow feeling is part of our nature. 

Now there are a lot of open questions. You might ask how would this develop over life span. You might ask, okay part of it maybe is hard wired, how could this evolve? Is it shared by other animals like chimpanzees and monkeys? You might arg-, wonder about the extent to which it varies across cultures. Are some people in some societies more compassionate than others? You might you might wonder to what extent is this compassion pure? Or to what extent it sort of regulated by self-interest, by selfish priorities. And those are all great questions. And in fact those are the sort of questions we're going to be dealing with throughout the rest of the course. But I want to turn now in the next lecture to the limits of compassion. So we've talked so far about our feelings towards those around us, what about our feelings towards strangers?

## 2.2: How Do We Treat Others?

I agree with Adam Smith that we have compassion towards those we are close to. I think he's right that you don't need any examples to show that. But when it comes to strangers, the issue is quite a bit more complicated. And actually the theme of how we think about strangers, and the way our moral psychology interacts with strangers, is to me so interesting and is important, that we're going to return to it over and over and over again, in the lectures that follow. But I want to to introduce the idea, here. And I want to sort of, for us to consider how we think about strangers, and, to, to, to introduce this idea, I'm going to give a lecture in four parts. 

So, the first part is an observation, and it's an observation by the primatologist and anthropologist Sarah Hardy. And Hardy, at the beginning of her wonderful book, Mothers and Others, describes being on an airplane. So she had been through security, she had been groped by the TSA agent, she's kind of crabby, she's sitting in a seat, she's, and, and, and the food is coming, you could smell the food, you could hear people in front of you getting it But she's, but it hasn't got to her yet. And somewhere on the plane, a baby starts crying. And people roll their eyes, and they're stuck together. And to pass the time, Hardy writes, I cannot help from wondering what would happen if my fellow human passengers suddenly morphed into another species of ape. What if I were traveling with a plane load of chimpanzees. Any one of us would be lucky to disembark with all 10 fingers and toes still attached. With the babies still breathing and un-maimed. Bloody earlobes and other appendages would litter the aisles. 

Compressing so many, highly impulsive strangers into such a tight space, would be a recipe for mayhem. Yet millions of us, billions of us, fly each year. And it's very rare that the plane lands and then they open up the doors and it's coated with blood and body parts and everything. We behave, we sit quietly, we wait our turn. And this is, this is extraordinary. This is an unusual response to strangers. As Hardy points out, chimpanzees and other primates, our closest evolutionary relatives, are nowhere near as nice. The response to dealing with the seen strangers, if you're a non-human primate, is often panic, is often aggression. But not for us. We are able to cope with strangers, we are able to inhibit our violence, our aggression, our frustration in the presence of strangers, and that's the first observation. 

The second part of this lecture, discusses how it's even better than that. It's not just that we don't want to kill other people who we were not used to. Rather is that, to some extent, we resonate to them, and we want to help them. And I think the, the clearest examples here are the internet. So any of us who spend a lot of time on the internet, and the fact you're watching me suggests you spend some time on the Internet, spends a lot of time dealing with strangers. Spends a lot of time dealing with people who aren't your friends, aren't your family. You never met them before. Yet we often have these productive, complicated interactions with strangers that aren't obviously self-serving. 

Now admittedly some of these interactions are not necessarily compassionate. Sometimes they're aggressive. Many people spend a lot of time on the internet arguing with strangers. This classic XKCD comic indicates the fact that it is extremely frustrating to deal with the somebody on the internet who is wrong. And there's a tremendous impulse to correct them. And the comment section on blogs refelcts this very human implulse. I wouldn't want to call that compassion, but there's a lot of what seems very cleary to be compassion and, and one example of this is sites with reviews. I'm thinking of Amazon and TripAdvisor, Travelocity, Yelp. These are sites that describe things like books, or products or restaurants, and then people come in and they, and they review them. And they tell you what they think of them. 

And, now some of these people may be motivated by gratitude in some way. When there is a negative review, you could say is revenge or vengeance. But for most part, people are going on to say, oh, I really like this show and what they're telling you is, they are, they are doing something for you. They are doing you a favor, but they don't know you. And this is altruism for the strangers, and it's a, it's an extraordinarily interesting fact about human nature.

When giving lists of irrational, not self serving behavior people often describe tipping. So, it's one thing to tip in a restaurant you're going to come back to because the size of your tip could affect your own, how people think of you, how people respond to you. But people leave tips in a restaurant they know they'll never going to go back to. They put money on the table. and, and even though they'll get no benefit from it. Or as an even more extreme case, think about, hotel rooms. And this varies from culture to culture. But there's, th, th, there's a custom in which I was raised in, that you're supposed to leave a tip when you leave a hotel room. So you, you know you pack up and everything and you put some money down. You maybe write a note that says thank you. The interesting thing about this is, this cannot conceivably help you in any way. It's not like the people who clean the room are going to say what a wonderful guy. I'll go back and do him a favor one day. They don't even know who you are. Yet we are compelled to do this. We might feel embarrassed if we forgot. We may feel ashamed of ourselves. We may feel proud of ourselves if we do it. And this goes to show that our morality is plugged in, in an interesting way, towards our interactions with people who we don't know, we will never know, we will never meet again. 

There's charity. People give an enormous amount of money to charity. Now, some of these charities are self-serving in a way. If I give money to support a museum that I myself am going to enjoy. Sometimes, the impulse to give to charity, may be an impulse to enhance our reputation, to show ourselves off as good people. Oh, look at, you know, I am donating this amount of money. I get my name listed in some program and people say, what a great guy he is. But some of our charitable acts are none of these. People give money to international charities to help starving children, and we often do this anonymously? No feedback, nothing. We do it because we feel it's right. We are compelled, we do this because we feel it's right and because we care about other people, again, people we will never see. 

This was this was the topic of a wonderful experiment by Stanley Milgram. And what he did was, he had letters made up. They were stamped, addressed letters. And so he made them up. And they'd say, with a person's name, I forget the name, you know? Joe Smith and an address. And he went through the streets of New Haven, or had his students do it, and would drop them. Or he'd put them up on a windowsill. Or he'd slip them under a door. None, none of them ended up, he didn't put any of them in a mailbox. So here's the question. How many of them would get, would be sent? They knew where they were sending them. They had to check the mailbox where it's supposed to be sent to. How many would be sent? In order for them to be sent, somebody has to pick up the letter, say oh, here's a letter. Go to a mailbox and drop it in. That was well over half. Well over half of these letters arrived at their destination. And this means that people must have picked up the letter and said, oh gosh, this is a letter that somehow went astray and put it in a mailbox. Again, an act which will do, which leads to no self-serving benefit. But it's simply done in some sense out of the goodness of your heart. Now if your cynical you might say maybe there's employees of the city or maybe people just automatically did it. 

But Milgram did something clever. Some of the letters were addressed to a person. Some of the letters were addressed to an organization that he felt people wouldn't like. So some of the letters were addressed to friends of the Nazi party. When they had that address they didn't arrive at the destination. So, it's not that they were indiscriminately looking at it and throwing it in a mailbox. Rather people were making a decision. And if it was for something which they didn't think was good, they wouldn't send it. 

There was even another study done by Dan Festler in California, where he looked at different things. But one of his conditions was, he did the same study as Milgram, except he didn't put a stamp on the letter, he just addressed it. Now most of those letters did not get back. But about 10 to 20% did. Which means people picked up a letter said oh, here's a letter for somebody it has no stamp. They went, they got a stamp, they put on it, and they mail it. And I think this is just extraordinary, I think this says something very interesting with how we work. So call those two stories the bright side of things, that's the positive side of our feelings to strangers. 

But there's also, as you could imagine, limitations about our compassion to strangers. There's, there's limits as to how much we care about them compared to how much we about the people around us. And the third case I'll give you is, is actually part of a comedy routine by Louis C K. This is unusual because it's the only Louis C K excerpt in which he doesn't swear. But he says something very interesting about our relationship to strangers. 

_My life is really evil, like I, there are people who are starving in the world, and I drive an Infinity. That's really evil. There are people who just starved to death, that's all they ever did. There's people who are like born, and they go, I'm hungry, and then they just die.  And that's all they ever got to do. And meanwhile I'm in my car, boom, boom like having a great time and I sleep like a baby. It's totally my fault because I could, I could trade my Infinity for like a really good car like a nice Ford Focus with no miles on it. And I'd get back like $20,000. And I could save hundreds of people from dying of starvation with that money, and every day I don't do it. Every day I make them die with my car._

Now Louis C.K. ends by saying, everyday I make them die with my car. And of course it's a joke. This isn't literally make them die. He doesn't literally kill them. He has no malice towards them. He's not acting to kill them. But in another level, it's not a joke. Another level, it actually reiterates a consequentialist argument that we've seen before. That one should judge actions based on their consequences. And from that point of view, if its true, that by buying a car instead sending the money to a charitable organization, if its true that this leads to the death of some kids, then Louis CK has killed them just as much as if he ran them all over with his car. 

Now this is a radical claim. It's a strong claim. It's in part the view of the philosopher Peter Singer who's a who is a consequentialist and who argues that we should judge our acts based on our consequences, and because of that, we should radically change how we how we treat people and, and, and our charitable giving. And he has a moving philosophical argument of which the conclusion is we should do more to help people in far away lands. And I have a feeling that, that Louie CK in his routine has actually drew upon the insides of Peter Singer. I'm going to present the argument right now. 

What's interesting is this argument, although it's been presented in philosophical journals and elsewhere, it's now presented as a Youtube video. So, this is the fourth and final case of how we think about strangers and it's expressed in this extremely interesting video. That's a political argument, it's a social argument. And, you may not believe it. You may object to it. You may disagree with it. You may endorse it, think it's very convincing. That's not the point here. My point is not to persuade you to do one thing or another. Those are your own decisions. 

But what I like about this video is that it illustrates certain things, certain psychological truths. And one truth it illustrates is that there's a psychological distinction between three categories of people. One category is the stranger in front of us. The girl we see, we know we don't know, but the girl we see drowning in the pond. The second category is an anonymous stranger, the one we don't see, the girl in Africa drowning in a pond. And then the third is the family member, our own daughter, our own mother, father, sister, brother, son um; and these are three categories of people and um; and we think very differently about them. And one insight is, when our natural reaction to them, is that we could care a lot about those in our life. People we love. People we, we interact with. And we are also driven to care a lot about a stranger, a drowning girl in front of us, as if seeing her triggers something. It triggers a sense of obligation. If I told you that I, I he'd, Singer never tries to make the argument we should help the girl in the pond. He just assumes it. And he's right to assume it. If I told you, I was rushing to work and there was a girl drowning, but I was kind of in an hurry, so I let her drown. You'd think I was a monster, and you'd be right. So you have on the one hand your feeling towards family members, your feelings towards people suffering for any. And then your feelings towards anonymous strangers. That's very different. We don't have the same pull. If I told you I knew about children in far away lands who were starving to death, who needed medical care, and I still bought a nice car, well, you might think I shouldn't be doing this, but you wouldn't think I'm a monster. In fact, most of us do stuff like that all the time. 

So you have these psychological distinctions. And this helps explain our moral reaction to a case we talked about in the very first lecture. So remember I told you the story, true story of these two guys who go in to the casino and one of them molests and kills the child, and the second one doesn't do anything. He just observes it, but he doesn't stop it. And later on he's interviewed on this, because they don't press charges, not a crime to just not help a stranger. If I walk past that drowning girl in the pond, I might end up saying morally wrong, but I haven't done anything legally wrong. And then he's asked, so what was up with that? And he says, the simple fact remains I don't know this little girl. I don't know people in Panama or Africa who are killed every day, so I can't feel remorse for them. And, you know, he's missing something. 

So he's actually right in his second claim. The people in far away lands if you're not in Panama, if you're not in Africa, you're not typically going to care about people who suffer there. It's okay not to do anything to help them. But that girl in front of you, the person in your vicinity, that person you should care about. Now, Peter Singer uses these psychological facts to make a moral argument. So he starts by saying he would help the little girl whose in front of you, and people watching you and say, yeah of course. Well, isn't that just the same, as if she was drowning in, in, in Africa? And then later on he says, oh, well maybe you think the girl in Africa is just a drop in a bucket. But what if she were your daughter? Isn't that the same? She's somebody's daughter. And so what you see here is an appreciation of our gut instincts. Singer is well aware that you don't normally think of the girl in Africa as we're saving, as we're sacrificing for. But he tries to argue through analogy that there's no real difference Between her case and the case, the cases where you do think you'd be right to intervene. And, among other things, this shows us the limits and the scope of compassion but it also illustrates moral argument. It illustrates how people could try to use reason, to try to use arguments, analogies, examples to change the way you think about the world. And I think this is deeply significant and it's another topic which we're going to continue to discuss, as these lectures develop.

## 2.3: Empathy and Concern

So, why would people matter to us? Where does compassion come from? You can imagine different possibilities. You can imagine people have compassion of a sort, just out of selfishness. It might be that your pleasure matters to me because in some way we're in the sort of a relationship where you being happy leads to be being happy. Maybe we're sort of business partners working together or something or we're in some sort of mutual benefit system, where your benefit is my benefit and your suffering is my suffering. I'll leave it for a question for later whether this even counts as compassion, but it's one source of nice behavior towards others. 

We might care about other people because of our religious code. You could imagine we care about other people because we believe that God wishes us to. We might care about other people because we are committed to some philosophical theory of morality of the sort we discussed earlier like consequentialsm or Kantian theory in which other people's happiness and feelings and goals matter to us. But many people have argued that a lot of what of goes on in compassion comes from our gut, comes from our heart. It is not a, it's not for self-serving benefit, nor is it because of our belief system. But, rather it's because we're wired up to care about other people. And the specific proposal as to what could drive compassion, and some people argue drive morality more generally, is that empathy plays an important role. 

So, let me define empathy. Empathy is based on a German word. The term is a new term, it was coined in the early 1900s, and it means to feel one's way into and when you think about empathy, you can think of it as being in someone else's shoes, putting yourself in someone else's shoes. 

Now, the idea that empathy plays a big role in, our morality and our compassion, is something again, you find in Adam Smith. So, Adam Smith argues that sort of foundation for caring about other people, is imagining yourself in their shoes. And he gives an example of how this can be, can be done. He says when, when we see a stroke aimed and just ready to fall upon the leg or arm of another person we naturally shrink and draw back our own leg or arm and when it does fall, we feel it in some measure, and are hurt by it as well as the sufferer. Now, once you start looking for examples of how empathetic connection, affects you, you can see them all over the place. 

Here's one of my favorite examples. It's, It's a picture from a wonderful book called Emotional Contagion and you can see the guy is tensing up in anticipated feeling of the pain of the needle of the child he's holding. And you know, I saw the movie Casino Royale, the James Bond movie a little while ago. And there's a scene where the character James Bond is shackled naked to a chair and then whacked in the testicles. And me and I think just about every other male in the theater is going oh, in vicarious pain. But it's not just pain, it's also pleasure.

Why would anybody enjoy watching another person laugh? Well, because somehow the happiness of the kid jumps from him to us and so it's hard to watch a video like that without being sort of cheered up a bit because we're naturally primed to take on the perspective and feeling of others. And in fact, when people develop theories of empathy, theories drawing upon psychology and neuroscience, they often see it as related to a more general, propensity to imitate other people, to be the people we are interacting with. Here is an example of the imitation. A soccer player has just missed a big kick and he, he puts his hand on both sides of his head. But now, look at the people around them. We imitate each other all the time. __There are studies showing that, when you have two people who are talking to each other, they'll unconsciously start to imitate the, the, the behavior of the other.__ My wife, when she's with her Texas relatives, she starts to drawl. And in fact, whenever you're talking to somebody with an accent, there's this irresistible temptation to start speaking that accent too. It's part of how we respond to other people. 

And it shows up like a lot of what I'm talking about, even in babies. __So, the developmental psychologist Andrew Meltzov, many years ago, found that, that babies are natural mimics.__ Here is a clip of him making different facial expressions and a baby making those expressions back at him. And you watch a mother or father with a baby, where you'll see is this sort of dance as it were, where one of them will make an expression other one will do it back and so on. Some people have argued that there's a specific neural system that underlies this imitation, underlies this empathy, known as mirror neurons. And mirror neurons were first discovered with, non human primates. And what they are is they're activated when you do an action like reach for something. But they're also activated, when you observe another individual do the same action. And this suggest that, that at some neural level there's no distinction between us and them. There's no distinction between you and another person. As we experience the, the, imitate the motor movements of another person you could feel a connection to them and this imitation could itself drive, drive empathy. 

So, one demonstration of this involves facial expressions and here the excellent works been done by the psychologist Paul Ekman. So, Paul Ekman points out there's certain universal facial expressions. Humans all around the world have them. And I've shown some of them here. They're, you go around, the list there, anger, fear, disgust, sadness, happiness, and surprise. These are universal. But what's interesting is two things. One thing is you'll naturally mimic someone's facial expression. So, if you're sitting across from me and I'm frowning. You'll start to frown. Also when you imitate the expression, due to the facial feedback that, that, that ensues you'll start to feel the same feelings that I'm feeling. So, if I'm really happy and I'm grinning like a idiot, you'll start to grin like an idiot and if you grin like an idiot it'll make you happy. Some of the most annoying advice you can tell a depressed person is you should smile more. This is incredibly annoying but it's true. It's true for two reasons. One is, if you smile people will smile back at you and they'll like you more. But the second one is, and there's, there's laboratory studies on this, the very act of going like this, of moving the corners of your lips upwards triggers the feelings typically associated with smiling, that is, happiness and smiling in some small way, boost your mood. It might be parenthetically that that is mirroring of, of others and, and our propensity to do so and the pleasure we get from doing so, could exlpain some mysteries of human psychologies. 

And these are mysteries that go quite a bit beyond the questions of morality we are interested but I can't resist talking about it here. So, I am going to show you a little clip. I am going to show it's, I'll show you one minute of this clip, and it's from a series of videos called, Where the Hell is Matt. Where this sort of non-descript guy dances to music with different people across the world. So, I show you this clip, the last like, minute, minute five seconds and as your watching it, monitor your own, for example monitor what your doing. And second, monitor your own feelings. We were all dancing here, me, the camera guys, everybody. That's one thing. One thing is upon seeing this, you'll be tempted to move with it. This is most extreme in children. My sons and I, when they were younger, we'd watch a lot of kung fu movies together. And they can't watch a kung fu movie without leaping up and kicking people and things, and so on. It's just irresistible. But second, not only are you tempted to move with it, but often there's some sort of warm feeling associated with it, some human connection. And this illustrates how other people's movements and your movements, and your propensity to imitate these movements lead to sort of connections of feelings, and connections of positive feelings. And this could be viewed as a manifestation of empathy. 

So, let's step back. You have concern for others, other people matter to you. And you have empathy which is putting yourself in other people's shoes. And you can do empathy through an act of imagination. You could think I wonder what it's like to be her and think about that. I wonder what, what his experience is like. But you could also do it viscerally by seeing another person, act in some way. The theory worth taking seriously then is that empathy is a spark for compassion. And it's not hard to see how this could work. 

Let's assume, because it's true, but it's kind of obvious, that I don't like feeling pain and so if I feel pain, I'll want to stop that. But let's also assume that if I see you in pain I'll feel your pain empathy, and I'll want to stop that. Because by stopping you from feeling your pain, I'll stop me from feeling, my pain. Suppose I see you happy and that makes me happy, I'll want more of that because I like being happy. You can say that empathy dissolves the boundaries between yourself and another person. And so, this predicts that when you are in empathetic state with somebody, when you are taking their persperctive, you will adopt their interest. You will care about them. You will feel compassion and concern. And there is a fair amount of evidence that this is true. 

A lot of work comes from the psychologist Dan Batson. And Batson has done dozens of studies, perhaps hundreds of studies by now, where he, he gets people in a situation where they have to choose whether to help somebody or whether to care about somebody. And he finds that if he can get them to feel empathy, to see it how they feel, to see it how, how the other person sees it, to feel it as the other person feels it, the odds of them being kind and caring go up. So, for instance, you could tell a story about a girl who is in line for a life saving operation, and there's other people ahead of her, and then if you just ask the person, ask your experimental subject, try to take this girl's perspective, try to see it as she seen it. That raises the odds your willing to take that girl and move her up to the front of the line, that you're willing to rescue her. Because the shared feelings motivate compassion. They motivate caring. In general, this effect, the fact that empathetic connections with individuals boost up your feelings towards them is the spark of what sometimes called the identifiable victim effect. 

__The identifiable victim effect is the idea that we care a lot more when there's a person in front of us than some numbers.__ And, and this is something which has been observed by many people. Joseph Stalin apocryphally said, a single death is a tragedy. A million deaths is a statistic. Mother Teresa said, if I look at the mass, I will never act. If I look at the one, I will. And there is actually experimental work done demonstrating this, so, there's, a series of wonderful studies done by Deborah Small and Paul Slovic and George Loewenstein, where you give people the facts, you give people data about a crisis, involving numbers and hard facts and you see how much they care. And, and how much they'll donate. And in this example where they throw out a lot of statistics at people, your average person hearing it will give about a dollar. But then another group, you tell about an individual, an individual with a name and with a face. And this bumps it up considerably. There are some studies that find that you will care more and give more to save one person with a name and a face, than five people who you are not told their names and you are not shown their faces. And this I think shows the power of empathy. 

Now, nothing that I'm saying would be a surprise to those who spend their lives trying to get people to give to charities. __So if you look at the, at the ads for charities, they don't say, okay, here's our charity, here's the statistics, here's the data, here's the graphs, and so on. They'll show you a picture. They'll tell you about an individual.__ I know this from personal experience. When I was in graduate school, I was extremely persuaded by Peter Singer's argument which I talked about in a previous lecture. That we need to give much more to charity, that, that we are doing something wrong by not, by, by spending money on luxuries instead of giving the money to save people's lives. I was very persuaded by this and still am kind of. And I would tell this to my friends. I tell this to my fellow graduate students, and, and you know, we'd be out for a beer and we'd be drinking a beer and I would say you know that beer could save a child's life. And, and you are murdering a child, and me too, by drinking these beers. And at one point one of my graduates, one of my friends who was a graduate student, a philosopher actually, got really sick of me. And he said, how much do you give to charity? And I was sort like well, dude, it's a philosophical argument here. But I thought, well nothing, actually. And I was poor graduate student, but I was much richer than the people I was concerned about. So, I decided I should give money to charity. 

So, I sent away, and this is pre-internet, so I sent away a postcard to an organization, Child Reach and asked for information. And I remember getting the packet and I remember opening up the packet. And I remember expecting to see a lot of information about what their charity does and how they work and where the money goes and so on. But they were much smarter than that. I open up the packet, and there in it was a picture wrapped up in plastic of a small child. And the letter said, Dear Mr. Bloom, we know, we know you have not commited to giving us any money. We know, we know you're just asking for information and that's, that's fair enough. But, but we have enclosed a pictrure and then he told me that this is, and he told me the child's name. And they said, we know you are not committed to giving us money. But if you do give us money, this is the life you will save. 

And that is psychologically so much more powerful than, than data and then facts. And, and, and actually my family's still sending money to that, to that child and his family many, many years later. Now you, you could argue further that the kindness the boost we get from empathy is, can motivate kind behavior not just to individuals but to the groups that the that those individuals belong to. And this is a claim defended by the philosopher Martha Nussbaum. So, Nussbaum writes, talking about Greek tragedies, although all of the future citizens who saw ancient tragedies were male, they were asked to have empathy for suffering of many whose lot could never be theirs, such as Trojans and Persians and Africans, such as wives and daughters and mothers. And her argument is that one of the things fiction can do, fiction, also journalism and stories, movies, T.V. shows, is they can put you, get you to have empathy. Get you to put you in the shoes of those who you wouldn't otherwise be, be with. And by doing so, you might care not just about, about that individual, that fictitious individual, but rather the group that the individual belongs to. 

My own bet is that feelings in America towards, homosexuals were radically affected by situation comedies like Will and Grace, which showed gay people in a positive way. Made you root for them, made you care for them, put yourself in their shoes. Attitudes in America towards African-Americans, I think, were transformed by shows like The Cosby Show, which again put people in the shoes of these, these African-Americans who were perfectly fine and fun and enjoyable, and people you could sympathize with. And then the sympathy expanded to the group as a whole. 

Now, this is largely speculation. But we do know, historically, that there are cases where fiction has caused interesting and important moral changes. And one example has to do with Harriett Beecher Stowe. The story goes that, Abraham Lincoln invited her to the White House at the beginning of the Civil War and said to her, so you're the little lady who's caused this great big war. And he was talking about Uncle Tom's Cabin, and Uncle Tom's Cabin is not a book of great philosophy or legal reasoning or, theology or morality. It's it-, it, it's fictional. But what it does is, it get, it got the readers who were predominantly white people, some of whom were slave owners, to put themselves in the shoes of of slaves and see what their experience was and by doing so, served as a catalyst for moral change. So, I have argued that empathy could be a force for morality, both at a individual level but also maybe as at the group level too. 

In further support of this, I think we could look now at precisely what's wrong with people who don't care about other people. People who lack compassion. And this brings us back to psychopaths. So, psychopaths also known as sociopaths, you can use what ever term, they're not sensitive. They're typically male. To be a psychopath is defined by all sorts of characteristics. A clinical psychologist named Hare developed a psychopathy test. If you're curious about yourself you could take it online. Psychopaths tend to be selfish, they're callous, they're impulsive, they're promiscuous and have a deficit in normal feelings. They have a deficit in love and loyalty and guilt and shame and anxiety. They tend to be cold blooded characters. Psychopathy comes in all sorts of flavors. In some extreme cases you have these cold blooded psychopaths who are also very violent people. And these people cause so much of the misery in the world. 

I'll give you a few quotes to give you a feeling for psychopathy. you, by the way when you think of a psychopath you may well think of Hannibal Lector. Who is a classic Silence of the Lambs psychopath. But I tend to think of James Bond to show you that they're not all necessarily bad guys. Some of the psychopaths might be on our side. But James Bond also fits many of the characteristics. The Daniel Craig James Bond, not the Roger Moore James Bond. So, so, how do psychopaths talk? How do they think? Well you have to use extreme examples one of them which was reported by Damon in his book on morality is of a 13 year old who who would mug blind people. And he'd mug blind people because he figured they couldn't identify them, him later. And he was then asked later on, so you know, don't you care about the people whose lives you destroy, the people you assault? What about this woman you just attacked? And his response, I think, perfectly captures what a person is like without compassion. 

He said, what do I care? I'm not her. And in some way that's a good argument. You're not her, why should you care? Well, because humans normally are usually wired up to care, but it's hard to figure a logical argument, why you should. Ted Bundy, who was a serial killer, was once, once in a, in an interview while in prison, expressed surprise at the fuss that was made, on, that all of his murders. He said at one point, you know there are so many people, he was kind of puzzled why people were so concerned. And, one of the creepier examples, and this is from Jon Ronson's excellent book The Psychopath Test, is a guy named Peter Woodcock. And and this guy he he had raped and murdered 3 children and ended up in a psychiatric facility for the rest of his life. But he did get a three-hour leave to walk around the grounds after some years of good behavior. In the course of this, he invited a friend of his who was also on this leave to join him for a walk, and then killed his friend with a hatchet. So, he was asked, interviewed later about this event. And, and here's how he described it. So, the interviewer says, asks, what was going through your mind at that time? This was somebody you loved. And the psychopath answers, curiousity, actually, an anger, because he had rebuffed on my advances. And why did you feel someone should die as a result of your curiosity? I just wanted to know what it would feel like to kill somebody. And the interviewer asks, but you had already killed three people. And Woodcock replies, yes, but that was years and years and years and years ago. 

So, what's wrong with psychopaths? __Well, one answer is, that among their many deficits, they don't have normal empathetic feelings, towards others.__ They don't feel other people's pain, they don't feel other people's pleasure. And because of that the suffering that they caused doesn't come back at them, it doesn't resonate. Some people have argued that along with all of their deficits including empathetic deficits there's something very specific, very specific that's wrong with them. And this comes from the work of the psychologist Abagail Marsh. So Marsh did a series of studies where she took psychopaths who were in her lab and she showed them a series of faces. And the idea is you have to identify the face. What emotional expression, you, correspondents to that face. So, they would look at the face, on the, on the upper left and say, boy that woman looks angry, and they look at the face of the guy in the middle bottom and say that's one happy guy. __But there was one sort of face, that they had a lot of problems recognizing. That is, they would look at that face and they wouldn't have the foggiest idea what the person was feeling, though for a normal person, it was it was obvious. So, the face I'm talking about is in the top middle. It's fear.__ And Marsh argues that psychopaths have this specific deficit, empathizing with the fear of other people. She tells a story of, of, of a study, an interview, with actually a female psychopath, who identified all of the faces easily, except could have no idea what fear was. And then, finally, it came to her, and she said,' I don't know what that expression is called, but I know it's what people look like, right before I stab them. And I'll end with that.

## 2.4: Empathy and its Limits

We began by talking compassion, about other people mattering to us. And what we did in our last lecture is we looked at empathy. Putting yourself in another person's shoes. And we explored the extent to which empathy can drive compassion, and can drive morality more generally. And I actually think any complete theory of our moral life has to draw upon empathy. Has to draw upon this putting ourselves in another's shoes? But I also think it's a lot more complicated than that. I think that there are limits to empathy. There are limits to empathy which make it unreliable and untenable as a source for morality. To put it differently, to the extent we're good people and we live good and moral lives. Sometimes we will rely on empathy but sometimes we'll reject empathy. So, why do we want to do that? 

Well, one thing is, empathy is biased. we, we feel a lot more affection, a lot more empathy for a, a, a kitten than for a piglet. We feel a lot more empathy for a panda than for a chicken. This is not because of a deep reason moral argument about suffering and pain and intelligence and feelings. It's because some things are adorable, some things trigger our emotions. But part of what it is to be a moral person is sometimes overriding the fact that, that we feel warmly towards this but not that and ask ourselves deeper questions having to do with suffering and pain. Maybe you're not convinced. Maybe you think we should rescue the kitten, no matter what. 

But what about people? So, I don't think there are many people who will defend this, which is that in the courtroom, ju-, juries are particularly biased in favor of defendants who are physically attractive and who are baby-faced. Because our emotional response to attractiveness and baby-facedness, the looks of youth, is innocence, is innocence and sweetness and compassion. But surely somebody who is ugly and kind of griseled deserves just as fair a treatment. So, it seems there's an unfair world in which a young Leonardo DiCaprio would be acquitted of any crime, because of how his face resonates to us. More generally I think part of what goes on when we make a correct moral decision involves overriding our empathetic feelings. And in some cases, it's pretty clear that empathy could drive us not just to the incorrect choice, but actually to a straight-out immoral act. 

In part because it could pull our attention towards the one and away from the many. so, so, remember the study I told you about before saying, that we could more about one person than about five people. Particularly one person if you could see that person. But that's crazy. That's morally crazy. We shouldn't be swayed. Everyone has a face. Everybody has a name. Providing a name and a, and a, and a face sways us, but that's not the way it should work. If you think for minute that, that, that the way to be a good person is try to help the most people, then will often lead you astray. 

And actually one of the studies by Dam Batson illustrates this. So remember, we talked about his study where there's a girl, and she's waiting in line for an operation and if you take her perspective you move her up the line. But as Batson points out nobody think's it's the right thing to move her up the line. Nobody thinks, say for a list of people waiting in line for a heart transplant, you should walk and look at all of them and whoever inspires your feelings the most you should give em the heart transplant first. That's not right, it's not right because what inspires your feelings has to do with things like attractiveness and baby-facedness and whether the person's the same color, whether the person same background as you. What you want to do to have a moral system is, you have a system that, that, that doesn't take certain things into account. That is based on, on reason and not, and not gut feelings. 

Now, these are examples where empathy is biased and empathy could lead you astray. But there's also another argument, which is that for a lot of what's core to our morality, empathy is not enough. Empathy is limited. And I'll give you a few examples of this. One is example is sort of is, is kind of particular, but I think it's telling. It, it, it is something pointed out by William James. So James talks about our relationships with our dogs. Many people have dogs as pets. They feel very affectionate towards them. They, they, they love them and they care about them. But James points out, this is not a relationship that's founded on empathy. If my dog, I don't know whether my dog ever tries to take my perspective. Here's here's me and my, and my, my dog. I don't know if she ever tries to take my perspective but I don't think she does. And if she does, I don't thinks he would have any understanding of what I do all day which is mostly sit in front of the computer and go like this. And I don't really take her perspective very much either because her life is a mystery to me. She seems to spend all of her voluntary time sniffing at disgusting things and trying to eat disgusting things and it's just strange. And yet, and yet I care a lot for her. And I'd like to think she cares a lot for me. 

And James' point is, that you would have a, you know, a personal relationship, relationships founded on love and compassion without empathy. Consider again, as maybe a more salient example, ones relationship with ones baby. Soon empathy emerges and, and, and, and there's a synchrony and so on, but from the get go there's none of that. But still there can be an enormous amount of love. A lot of this sort of personal ideals, that matter to us most, don't have as much to do with empathy as one might first think. Now empathy is a particular, sorry, is particularly weak, when it comes to our finest moral ideals. When it comes to more general policy, and particularly when it comes to our treatment of strangers. And some of the weaknesses of empathy are nicely summarized by Steven Pinker, in his wonderful book Better Angels of our Nature, which we'll talk about later on in the class. So Pinker writes, I can't say that it's empathy that prevents me from taking out contracts on my critics, getting the fistfights over parking spaces, or threatening my wife when she points out I've dong something silly. My mind doesn't stop and ponder what it would be like to be the victims of these kind of violence and then recoil after feeling the victim's pain. Rather, my mind never goes in those directions in the first place. Pinker goes on to say that, you know, the Old Testament says you should love thy neighbor. The New Testament says you should love thy enemy. But frankly, he doesn't love either one of them. He loves the people he loves. But most of the world, his neighbors, his enemies and so on, he doesn't love them at all. And I, I don't love my, most of my neighbors and my enemies either, but we are moral towards them, we don't kill them. In some situations we will help them, we will sacrifice to help them.

And this shows that feelings have their limits. That, that sometimes our morality is grounded in, not in gut feelings, but in moral principles. And the importance of moral principles, the importance of moral reason, and the limits of gut feelings, are actually nicely illustrated in a story told by, yes, by Adam Smith. And I'm going to present his story. I'm going to modify it slightly for a more modern age. Imagine you learn about a death of sa-, thousands of strangers. Imagine you learn it, I mean Smith wrote in the 1700s, but imagine you learn yourself, right. You open up your computer, you put on your computer browser, and out comes some new stories. And one of news stories is in a country that you don't belong to. India, Argentina United States you know, Australia. Some place you don't know about. Some place that is not where you are. Thousands of people died. They died of a salmonella epidemic, they died of an earthquake, they died of, of a factory fire. How would you respond? Well, this actually isn't so strange to you, because if you open up your browser every day, thousands of people often die. So how do you respond? Well, I bet, I bet you, you know you say, oh, well that's too bad. That's unfortunate. Then you go about your business. 

And Adam Smith says that, that when exposed to the death of thousand of strangers. We will remark our disapproval, and say, oh, how what a terrible world, and then we will go on our life, and that night we will sleep with the most profound serenity. Now, imagine something different. Imagine instead, you were to learn that tomorrow you are going to lose your little finger. You can't see, so this is Smith's example, that tomorrow there going to chop off your little finger. You would say wow. You would say, wow, you would say, that's terrible. That's, that's, how am I going to, are they going to anesthesia? Which finger, which? How are they going to, why? What? And that night you wouldn't sleep a wink. So plainly, from a gut feeling, from an emotional response, the loss of your little finger matters more than the death of thousands of strangers. So this raises a question then, and a question is this: Since it matters so much more, this loss of a finger than the death of a thousand strangers. Would it follow that someone would sacrifice thousands of lives to save his little finger? 

And Smith writes, human nature startles with horror at the thought. His answer is no, nobody would do that. Look I'll even change the example. If you're extremely fond of your little finger maybe you would do that. I'll change the example. You discover that thousands of people are going to die, you say, oh, how sad, they've died, how sad, but also you notice your computer is slow. Your browser is slow. It's very frustrating. It's slow, it's unreliable, maybe your connection's fading in and out. It does not seem implausible, in fact it seems true, that that slow connection's going to bother you a lot more, than learning by the death of thousands of people. But still, if somebody, if you were offered then to speed up your connection, but thousands of people would die, you would say that's insane. 

So, here's the question then, and this is a question asked by Adam Smith. When our passive feelings are almost always so sordid and so selfish, how comes it that our active principles should often be so generous and so noble? And Smith continues, it is reason, principle, conscience; this calls to us, with a voice capable of astonishing the most presumptuous of our passions, That we are but one of the multitude, in no respect better than any other in it. And this last phrase sums up morality. What a sophisticated morality is goes beyond gut feelings and selfish urges and desires to help people. But it also includes an understanding that we are but one of the multitude, in no respect better than any other in it. 

__And what you see in moral systems all around the world, from religion, from philosophy, is an appreciation that a moral code doesn't care about you as special.__ A moral code says, you're not special. It says that we have to figure out how to live our lives such e-, e-, in a way that would somehow apply to everybody. So this shows up in all of the versions of the golden rule. And all of Confucian statements about impartiality. It shows up in the consequentialism that we talked about, where the, the right way to live is to try to increase overall amount of pleasure and decrease overall amount of pain. It shows up in in Kant's categorical imperative. Where you should have a principle that applies to everybody that would make the world better all around. It applies to theories like John Rawls' Veil of Ignorance or Adam Smiths own Impartial Spectator. Now, it might sound like this is some sort of technical idea that, that only, you know, gurus and, and, and great intellects could think about, but in some sense, this is, this is a common sense that's accessible to all of us. We all appreciate that the right thing to do is often not about appealing to our gut and appealing to our immediate feelings and prejudices, but, but also to, to take the bigger view. 

And my favorite summary of this is from Rick Blaine, the character played by Humphrey Bogart in Casablanca. And so the movie ends, sort of spoiler alert because I'm going to show you a clip. The movie ends with him talking about a sacrifice he must make, he and his, and his lover must make and why they must make it.

> But it doesn't take much to see that the problems of three little people don't amount to a hill of beans in this crazy world.

That is an astonishingly rich philosophical statement. And the fact that we could understand it, that we could understand that the problems of three little people don't amount to a hill of beans, compared to everything else that's going on shows that we're moral creatures. And making this sort of argument and extending this sort of argument back and forth to each other, is an example of how reason could play a role in our moral lives. So I started off, in the last week, talking about the power of gut feelings, the power of emotions and morality. Providing demonstration after demonstration after demonstration of how emotion shapes our moral reasoning and our moral action, and yet all of that's true. But now we're starting to encounter the power of reason. The power of reason that says that, yeah I know I favor this over that. I know I'm empathetic towards that, this rather than that. I know my selfish desires go for this rather than that. But I recognize that it's wrong. I recognize that there are higher moral principles at work, there are higher moral principles at stake. I may be happier if I save my little finger and a thousand people could die and but know that, that's wrong. I know that that's wrong because I know the people, the, the thousand other people are sons and fathers and mothers and daughter just as much as I am and the people I love are. And a appreciation of both the power of the emotions and the power of reason and rationality leads us to I think a more sophisticated understanding of what goes on in our moral lives. And I think now focusing on the interplay of emotion and reason, makes moral psychology a lot more interesting.

## [Readings: The baby in the well](http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2013/05/20/130520crat_atlarge_bloom?printable=true&currentPage=all#ixzz2s2suukaX)

Obama said that it is important to be able “to see the world through the eyes of those who are different from us—the child who’s hungry, the steelworker who’s been laid off, the family who lost the entire life they built together when the storm came to town.” He went on, “When you think like this—when you choose to broaden your ambit of concern and empathize with the plight of others, whether they are close friends or distant strangers—it becomes harder not to act, harder not to help.”

__Batson has found that simply instructing his subjects to take another’s perspective made them more caring and more likely to help.__

Some of the same neural systems that are active when we are in pain become engaged when we observe the suffering of others. Other researchers are exploring how empathy emerges in chimpanzee and other primates, how it flowers in young children, and the sort of circumstances that trigger it.

This interest isn’t just theoretical. If we can figure out how empathy works, we might be able to produce more of it. Some individuals staunch their empathy through the deliberate endorsement of political or religious ideologies that promote cruelty toward their adversaries, while others are deficient because of bad genes, abusive parenting, brutal experience, or the usual unhappy goulash of all of the above. At an extreme lie the one per cent or so of people who are clinically described as psychopaths.

Emily Bazelon writes, “The scariest aspect of bullying is the utter lack of empathy”—a diagnosis that she applies not only to the bullies but also to those who do nothing to help the victims. Few of those involved in bullying, she cautions, will turn into full-blown psychopaths. __Rather, the empathy gap is situational: bullies have come to see their victims as worthless; they have chosen to shut down their empathetic responses.__ But most will outgrow—and perhaps regret—their terrible behavior. “The key is to remember that almost everyone has the capacity for empathy and decency—and to tend that seed as best as we possibly can,” she maintains.

Empathy has been the main driver of human progress, and that we need more of it if our species is to survive. Ehrlich and Ornstein want us “to emotionally join a global family.” Rifkin calls for us to make the leap to “global empathic consciousness.”

This enthusiasm may be misplaced, however. Empathy has some unfortunate features—it is parochial, narrow-minded, and innumerate. We’re often at our best when we’re smart enough not to rely on it.

Why do people respond to these misfortunes and not to others? The psychologist Paul Slovic points out that, when Holloway disappeared, the story of her plight took up far more television time than the concurrent genocide in Darfur. Each day, more than ten times the number of people who died in Hurricane Katrina die because of preventable diseases, and more than thirteen times as many perish from malnutrition.

There is, of course, the attention-getting power of new events. Just as we can come to ignore the hum of traffic, we become oblivious of problems that seem unrelenting, like the starvation of children in Africa—or homicide in the United States.

The key to engaging empathy is what has been called “the identifiable victim effect.” 

The number of victims hardly matters—there is little psychological difference between hearing about the suffering of five thousand and that of five hundred thousand.

In the broader context of humanitarianism, as critics like Linda Polman have pointed out, the empathetic reflex can lead us astray. When the perpetrators of violence profit from aid—as in the “taxes” that warlords often demand from international relief agencies—they are actually given an incentive to commit further atrocities. It is similar to the practice of some parents in India who mutilate their children at birth in order to make them more effective beggars. The children’s debilities tug at our hearts, but a more dispassionate analysis of the situation is necessary if we are going to do anything meaningful to prevent them.

A “politics of empathy” doesn’t provide much clarity in the public sphere, either. Typically, political disputes involve a disagreement over whom we should empathize with. Liberals argue for gun control, for example, by focussing on the victims of gun violence; conservatives point to the unarmed victims of crime, defenseless against the savagery of others. Liberals in favor of tightening federally enforced safety regulations invoke the employee struggling with work-related injuries; their conservative counterparts talk about the small businessman bankrupted by onerous requirements. So don’t suppose that if your ideological opponents could only ramp up their empathy they would think just like you.

On many issues, empathy can pull us in the wrong direction. The outrage that comes from adopting the perspective of a victim can drive an appetite for retribution. (Think of those statutes named for dead children: Megan’s Law, Jessica’s Law, Caylee’s Law.) But the appetite for retribution is typically indifferent to long-term consequences. In one study, conducted by Jonathan Baron and Ilana Ritov, people were asked how best to punish a company for producing a vaccine that caused the death of a child. Some were told that a higher fine would make the company work harder to manufacture a safer product; others were told that a higher fine would discourage the company from making the vaccine, and since there were no acceptable alternatives on the market the punishment would lead to more deaths. Most people didn’t care; they wanted the company fined heavily, whatever the consequence.

Too often, our concern for specific individuals today means neglecting crises that will harm countless people in the future.

Rifkin and others have argued, plausibly, that moral progress involves expanding our concern from the family and the tribe to humanity as a whole. Yet it is impossible to empathize with seven billion strangers, or to feel toward someone you’ve never met the degree of concern you feel for a child, a friend, or a lover. Our best hope for the future is not to get people to think of all humanity as family—that’s impossible. It lies, instead, in an appreciation of the fact that, even if we don’t empathize with distant strangers, their lives have the same value as the lives of those we love.

That’s not a call for a world without empathy. A race of psychopaths might well be smart enough to invent the principles of solidarity and fairness. (Research suggests that criminal psychopaths are adept at making moral judgments.) __The problem with those who are devoid of empathy is that, although they may recognize what’s right, they have no motivation to act upon it. Some spark of fellow-feeling is needed to convert intelligence into action.__

Putting aside the extremes of psychopathy, there is no evidence to suggest that the less empathetic are morally worse than the rest of us. Simon Baron-Cohen observes that some people with autism and Asperger’s syndrome, though typically empathy-deficient, are highly moral, owing to a strong desire to follow rules and insure that they are applied fairly.

Where empathy really does matter is in our personal relationships. Nobody wants to live like Thomas Gradgrind—Charles Dickens’s caricature utilitarian, who treats all interactions, including those with his children, in explicitly economic terms. Empathy is what makes us human; it’s what makes us both subjects and objects of moral concern. Empathy betrays us only when we take it as a moral guide.

Newtown, in the wake of the Sandy Hook massacre, was inundated with so much charity that it became a burden. More than eight hundred volunteers were recruited to deal with the gifts that were sent to the city—all of which kept arriving despite earnest pleas from Newtown officials that charity be directed elsewhere. A vast warehouse was crammed with plush toys the townspeople had no use for; millions of dollars rolled in to this relatively affluent community. We felt their pain; we wanted to help. Meanwhile—just to begin a very long list—almost twenty million American children go to bed hungry each night, and the federal food-stamp program is facing budget cuts of almost twenty per cent. Many of the same kindly strangers who paid for Baby Jessica’s medical needs support cuts to state Medicaid programs—cuts that will affect millions. Perhaps fifty million Americans will be stricken next year by food-borne illness, yet budget reductions mean that the F.D.A. will be conducting two thousand fewer safety inspections. Even more invisibly, next year the average American will release about twenty metric tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, and many in Congress seek to loosen restrictions on greenhouse gases even further.

Such are the paradoxes of empathy. The power of this faculty has something to do with its ability to bring our moral concern into a laser pointer of focussed attention. If a planet of billions is to survive, however, we’ll need to take into consideration the welfare of people not yet harmed—and, even more, of people not yet born. They have no names, faces, or stories to grip our conscience or stir our fellow-feeling. Their prospects call, rather, for deliberation and calculation. Our hearts will always go out to the baby in the well; it’s a measure of our humanity. But empathy will have to yield to reason if humanity is to have a future.

## [Jon Ronson: Strange answers to the psychopath test](http://www.ted.com/talks/jon_ronson_strange_answers_to_the_psychopath_test.html)

It was a man called Brian who runs a crack team of Scientologists who are determined to destroy psychiatry wherever it lies. They're called the CCHR. And I said to him, "Can you prove to me that psychiatry is a pseudo-science that can't be trusted?" And he said, "Yes, we can prove it to you." And I said, "How?" And he said, "We're going to introduce you to Tony." And I said, "Who's Tony?" And he said, "Tony's in Broadmoor." Now Broadmoor is Broadmoor Hospital. It used to be known as the Broadmoor Asylum for the Criminally Insane. It's where they send the serial killers and the people who can't help themselves. And I said to Brian, "What did Tony do?" And he said, "Hardly anything. He beat someone up or something, and he decided to fake madness to get out of a prison sentence. But he faked it too well, and now he's stuck in Broadmoor and nobody will believe he's sane.

And then Brian said, "Here's Tony." And a man was walking in. And he wasn't overweight, he was in very good physical shape. And he wasn't wearing sweatpants, he was wearing a pinstriped suit. And he had his arm outstretched like someone out of The Apprentice. He looked like a man who wanted to wear an outfit that would convince me that he was very sane.

Tony said that it's a lot harder to convince people you're sane than it is to convince them you're crazy. He said, "I thought the best way to seem normal would be to talk to people normally about normal things like football or what's on TV. I subscribe to New Scientist, and recently it had an article about how the U.S. Army was training bumblebees to sniff out explosives. So I said to a nurse, 'Did you know that the U.S. army is training bumblebees to sniff out explosives?' When I read my medical notes, I saw they'd written: 'Believes bees can sniff out explosives.'" He said, "You know, they're always looking out for non-verbal clues to my mental state. But how do you sit in a sane way? How do you cross your legs in a sane way? It's just impossible." And when Tony said that to me, I thought to myself, "Am I sitting like a journalist? Am I crossing my legs like a journalist?"

He said, "You know, I've got the Stockwell Strangler on one side of me and I've got the 'Tiptoe Through the Tulips' rapist on the other side of me. So I tend to stay in my room a lot because I find them quite frightening. And they take that as a sign of madness. They say it proves that I'm aloof and grandiose." So only in Broadmoor would not wanting to hang out with serial killers be a sign of madness. Anyway he seemed completely normal to me -- but what did I know?

And when I got home I emailed his clinician, Anthony Maden. I said, "What's the story?" And he said, "Yep. We accept that Tony faked madness to get out of a prison sentence because his hallucinations that had seemed quite cliché to begin with just vanished the minute he got to Broadmoor. However, we have assessed him. And we have determined that what he is is a psychopath." And in fact, faking madness is exactly the kind of cunning and manipulative act of a psychopath. It's on the checklist: cunning and manipulative. So faking your brain going wrong is evidence that your brain has gone wrong. And I spoke to other experts, and they said the pinstriped suit -- classic psychopath. Speaks to items one and two on the checklist -- glibness, superficial charm and grandiose sense of self-worth. And I said, "Well, what, he didn't want to hang out with the other patients?" Classic psychopath -- it speaks to grandiosity and also lack of empathy. So all the things that had seemed most normal about Tony was evidence, according to his clinician, that he was mad in this new way. He was a psychopath.

And his clinician said to me, "If you want to know more about psychopaths, you can go on a psychopath spotting course run by Robert Hare who invented the psychopath checklist." So I did. I went on a psychopath spotting course, and I am now a certified -- and I have to say, extremely adept -- psychopath spotter.

So here's the statistics: One in a hundred regular people is a psychopath. So there's 1,500 people in his room.

Hare said the reason why is because capitalism at its most ruthless rewards psychopathic behavior -- the lack of empathy, the glibness, cunning, manipulative. In fact, capitalism, perhaps at its most remorseless, is a physical manifestation of psychopathy. It's like a form of psychopathy that's come down to affect us all.

I emailed "Chainsaw Al" Dunlap, the asset stripper from the 1990s. He would come into failing businesses and close down 30 percent of the workforce, just turn American towns into ghost towns. And I emailed him and I said, "I believe you may have a very special brain anomaly that makes you special and interested in the predatory spirit and fearless. Can I come and interview you about your special brain anomaly?" And he said, "Come on over."

And he looked intrigued despite himself, and he said, "Okay, go on." And I said, "Okay. Grandiose sense of self-worth." Which, I have to say, would have been hard for him to deny because he was standing underneath a giant oil painting of himself. (Laughter) He said, "Well, you've got to believe in you!" 

And I said, "Manipulative." He said, "That's leadership." And I said, "Shallow affect: an inability to experience a range of emotions." He said, "Who wants to be weighed down by some nonsense emotions?" So he was going down the psychopathic checklist, basically turning it into "Who Moved My Cheese?"

I realized that becoming a psychopath spotter had turned me a little bit psychopathic. Because I was desperate to shove him in a box marked psychopath. I was desperate to define him by his maddest edges.

When I got back to London, Tony phoned me. He said, "Why haven't you been returning my calls?" I said, "Well they say that you're a psychopath." And he said, "I'm not a psychopath." He said, "You know what, one of the items on the checklist is lack of remorse, but another item on the checklist is cunning, manipulative. So when you say you feel remorse for your crime, they say, 'Typical of the psychopath to cunningly say he feels remorse when he doesn't.' It's like witchcraft. They turn everything upside-down."

So I went to his tribunal. And after 14 years in Broadmoor, they let him go. They decided that he shouldn't be held indefinitely because he scores high on a checklist that might mean that he would have a greater than average chance of recidivism. So they let him go. And outside in the corridor he said to me, "You know what, Jon? Everyone's a bit psychopathic." He said, "You are. I am. Well obviously I am." I said, "What are you going to do now?" He said, "I'm going to go to Belgium because there's a woman there that I fancy. But she's married, so I'm going to have to get her split up from her husband."

And then he phoned me. And you know what, I think it's right that Tony is out. Because you shouldn't define people by their maddest edges. And what Tony is, is he's a semi-psychopath. He's a gray area in a world that doesn't like gray areas. But the gray areas are where you find the complexity, it's where you find the humanity and it's where you find the truth. And Tony said to me, "Jon, could I buy you a drink in a bar? I just want to thank you for everything you've done for me." And I didn't go. What would you have done?

## [Upside of Irrationality Chapter 9: On Empathy and Emotion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DlzHxULncNM)

Why is it the case that we don't care about malaria? Could it be because it's just a big problem?

Tsunami/9-11, could it be because it's closer or it's more shocking?

How much we care vs. magnitude of the problem doesn't matter. It's all about activating the emotions. So how do we get people to care?

American cancer society: The word "cancer." The word "survivor." People are asked to recruit friends and families, so people get connected.

__The key to action is not thoughtful deliberation, it's emotion.__ If we think in a calculated manner, we will be selfish. The activation of emotion will get us to care about the problems.