## [Stan Christensen/Steve Young, The Art of Negotiation](http://academicearth.org/courses/the-art-of-negotiation/)

Get people loose with alcohol and work them into submission and say "we can't lose this bla bla." He would use his stamina to negotiate through endless hours and wore people down. He also overprepared. He overprepared and he used data to make things favorable every time. He used the moral high ground of logic, "we're just going through this". Certainly there was a way of making the data look bad, but since he overprepared, they weren't able to cut it in another way. They can't just say "time out". Also think of the compensation, it might be in payment or in fame etc. He was energized in the fiel.

You have to lose yourself in your negotiation. We tend to do the least. We want to do the most we can with the least amount of effort. How do you inspire the guys to help me? I would wear them out with my self-sacrifice. I never show a sign of victimization. Any time your things can go wrong, it's human to think of excuses. I knew the second I showed an excuse, they would respond negatively. I won them over time by never cracking. I went home to call my dad, but I gained respect because I wouldn't do it when the light is on. I can't just tell them some rah-rah story, the only thing I can do was go to work, keep my mouth shut, and never give an excuse.

When I retired they don't remember anything negative. The safest way to play football is to play ignorantly, don't think of the impact of sports in society. Since you're the quarterback you're the center of attention. The rest of your teammates have basically told you, "you're the quarterback do something great", and they then say "why did you do that" when you throw it to the other team. Human nature is to make an excuse about it because they didn't do it on purpose. So you want to make a logical explanation: "receiver moved the wrong way". Guys don't respond to my explanations, what they responded to was "look, I screwed and messed it up." The hard part is "we're going to go fix it". Everyone gets energized after. Now everyone has accountability, because the guy who screwed up was accountable.

We have to be careful with soft skills. Everyone says "I want to be a great player". You have to be with great people, no one quarterback can win a game. Getting to really know somebody is important. Human nature when you make mistakes is "I want to quit, I just want to get to the bus". You have to be careful on how to make people motivated. Ex: Jerry Rice wanted to think of the idea to get motivated. Terrell Owens said "please don't give up on me", he's a young kid asking the veteran quarterback. I just told him that he was the best football player here, and I'm going to throw him the ball as long as he was open. I owned them in that moment, but the talent is stepping in that guy's school. Soft skills are about being in other people's shoes, and the only way you can do that is to spend time with them, and to get to know them. Maybe it was easier for me, but I wanted to know everyone's wives names and hometown and when you're involved in their lives, you get things more and more layered. I got to a point where Jerry Rice would be running down the field and we were just looking at each other but we knew where he was going.

You need to stand back and ask yourself, "what am I good at" and "what are my weaknesses, such as temper". Let's start understanding them and mitigating them. I need to find a way to grow around these weaknesses. Since I was 6'0" I wasn't able to see some of the receivers, but I knew where they were. They don't really care if I threw a blind pass anyway. That's why self-analysis is important because you are the only one who can say "you know what, I have holes". Good negotiators can use your weakness, which they know more than you, as a crutch against you every time.

If you take advantage of your teammates' insecurities, you're going to run them to the ground. I studied all the film of my opponents and I understood each of their weaknesses. Darren Woodson (safety) was tricky but his tricks were all the same, because we're creatures of habit. Once you understand yourself you can do the same technique to your opponents. Every time Darren would blitz me he would not look at me. *Truthfully though, in most negotiations, if there's not a sense and we don't allow people a place to land, you're in for something, because people will not give in if you don't give them a place to go.*

Bill Walsh was already enlightened in human relationships, when it was traditional to not give peopel water when they were tired, he gave water anyway. He loved to come up with great ideas, he was ingenious. I noticed that if you feed him something, he's saying "now that's a great idea", and boom, we're on another way. He wants to make it about you, not about him. He wants you to get in the flow, so rather than fighting him and say "I have good ideas too", you'd just go and get in. He starts saying "hey you got good ideas". That's probably a good way of getting peopel to agree with you. There's no time to rethink, it was "here and now, there's no excuses, the lights are on, and for the next three hours. It's going to be embarassing, or it's going to be great, depending on how we handle it."

Media guys would write things that were bad. The beat writers would need to write something every day. There's just not many interesting things going on every day, but they have to write a story. There's no way to win with them, because they thrive on that stuff. It wasn't that I was going to win them over by being nice, it's just had I had no way of being influential on what was going to happen. I was just like "they're not going away, they're here every day." These people drive a long way from Napa Valley and I just thought, the best things I can do, is to just give them something, something they can write a story about. What if the quarterback actually just talked to him something. "So you know what, there's this new type of grass that we have." They were able to write a story about it! It was more like "look, we're in this together", and treat it in a way that we can make things easier for each other.

Most of life is just about managing relationships. For football, it was different. The soft skills in football was the same in marriage and with my kids. Ex: With my kids, I have to ask myself, what's their experience? From their perspective, they were just in the car.

The value of doing forceful negotiation over time is diminishing returns. There are going to be super goals out there, but we don't want negotiations to be about winning and losing.

Kids are fundamentally irrational but from my own experience, I've noticed is that I'm all about getting things accomplished and I want the kids to think yeah. I find myself rationalizing with them. I just want to think that "we're all marching together." Eventually there's an irrational moment, and I want to still rationalize with them. We have goals and we want to accomplish them. You have to navigate to get to the goal many times. I found that I needed to navigate the kids because if I didn't, it's going to be difficult for them, and a hollow victory for me. It's taught me to be creative. I'm very goal oriented, but a lot of the times the things you are good at, they stick out at the back. *You really want to figure things out how effectively: accentuate the good stuff, get rid of the stuff you're bad at, and get better at the stuff you're mediocre in.* Kids have a way of making you think about things not about yourself.

I loved doing the "Super Bowl then law school the next day". In 1994, when I was getting older, I thought that in order to get something from the venture capital guys, we could offer them locker room access. It worked: we got great relationships, we started a fund business thing. We are able to get a little busines going. My goal after I retired was to be the dumbest guy in the room, for the next ten years. And that was very easy to do.

The first thing I needed to know was that it wasn't about Joe Montana. It was about finding out how good of a guy I can get. And that changed everything. When I realized that "I might be horrible, but I want to know how good I can be", things changed. There are moments: big victories, and actually things are 9/10 perception. I'm a 2xMVP and it was galling to me that I was being subbed out, and I exploded, and I never exploded before. I wanted to fight my coach and I challenged him to a fight. He didn't turn around, and he won't fight me on National TV. I would have fought him on National TV. But then they reported me as a "fiery leader", lol. So that's when the perception of me in the media changed. So another great thing is to figure out, how am I perceived? So I tell players, don't complain, don't moan, but always think of how you are perceived.

In football, I wanted to get people to perform. In business, I had an agreement in money. It's about how much and when do I get the deal. In the end, the reason why we get to be the one who makes the deal, is that everyone has unique things and needs in their sale. No one says the goals anyway. So you want to get to a comfort level of hey, what do you need the money for anyway? We want to individualize it and get to know what people are really worried about. How about we get rid of the walls?

Negotiations are great when you

Try to make a judgment for yourself. Am I a people skills person? If you are then you're most probably a great negotiator. You get to be better at this by observing other people. :)
