## 1 - 1 - Philosophy, Modernity, and Intellectual History, part 1 of 2 (14_18)

Today we're going to, let's talk about The Enlightenment. I'm going to do so by looking at a German philosopher, Immanuel Kant, writing in the second half of the 1700s really when there was no Germany yet. I think that's important for everybody to remember. That German speaking Europe is a whole bunch of principalities with some strong big states like Prussia, Austria, Bavaria. But there's no unified Germany yet. And Kant is writing this text, which we've assigned for the course, WWhat is Enlightenment?," as his attempt to articulate why the progress, in education progress, in knowledge progress, in thinking is not only good for individuals, but will it have a salutary effect on society. 

Lots of the leaders of these societies were very worried about enlightenment because they thought as people became more educated, as people became more independent, they might actually not want to be subjects to kings anymore, or subjects to aristocrats. And so, Kant on the one hand is saying, enlightenment is really important. It's something we need to extenuate, emphasize to, to energize. On the other hand he wants to say, don't worry about it. If you're, if you're member of the elite, you have nothing to fear from enlightenment because enlightenment in the end can be a powerful ingredient in the increase of power for the whole state, for the whole society. 

These two magically, powerful thinkers in the middle of the 1700s, late 1700s Rousseau and Kant. So 1784 is when Kant writes.

What is Enlightenment? What happens, what's the big event in the 1780s? Alright. French, French Revolution. When is the French Revolution? 1789. 1789. Okay, there we go. That's a date that we all should know. Think, think, think. That's going to be very helpful to us, alright? This is a Euro, we're very kind of, Euro snobs in this class. So 1776, okay. 1789, that's really an important date for us. So, what we're doing is reading two texts here or three really, prior to the French Revolution, which changes the world of culture, dramatically, and politics, and economics. As does 1776, but that's a different course. 

So What is Enlightenment? is, as I said, a small text of Kant's. It's even a work of journalism. Today, we, we need to understand a little bit about the philosophical context that Kant operated in. In some ways, the intellectual context of the 18th century, to which he is responding. May be I should say a word about enlightenment from our perspective at least from, I should say, my perspective as your professor. 

There are lots of definitions of enlightenment. Here is one I think that you can find useful for the, for the duration of this course, and perhaps even beyond. And that is enlightenment is the project to make the world more of a home for human beings. *Enlightenment is a project to make the world more of a home for human beings through the use of reason.* Through the use of reason. That's really important because making the world more of a home for us, that is reducing its dangers, bringing out its potential through the use of reason, is going to demand science, is going to demand education, and is going to demand certain call for freedom that will allow people to transform the world to make it more hospitable for human beings. 

The enlightenment also though is a social movement. It is not just a bunch of big shot philosophers talking about big ideas, it's a whole range of writers who take Voltaire's injunction to _ecrasez l'infame_ which really means, well it means, squash out infamy. But it, it, it means, get rid of all the nonsense. Get rid of all the bologna getting in the way of progress. And for many journalists, for many small time intellectuals, we could call them, this just means that showing that people who are already full of themselves, people who have power and prestige, and a certain kind of snob appeal, that those people are just nonsense and we have to get rid of them. We have to show that we can do better than that. 

So, the enlightenment is a philosophical side, and then there's this kind of journalistic, social movement side. Kant is responding to both of those things in this essay. 

Kant describes himself as steering a middle course for philosophy. What did that mean? *It meant for Kant that he would defend reason, defend science, defend this new form of enlightenment. But also he said, he would make room for faith, make room for belief.* He wanted to have his cake and eat it too, if we can use that expression. History of philosophy from Plato to Kant is consumed with the problem of how do you, how do you connect the ideal and the real? For Plato it was the ideal forms, the ideas, sometimes you call them, how are they related to the real. In Kant's time, that question took the form of a battle about skepticism. 

And I want to give you a little bit of background about that before we go into more into Kant proper. The mona pre, the battle skepticism can be framed beginning with Descartes. Rene Descartes, who wrote famously on the discourse on the method a sentence that everybody who study a little philosophy should remember. And that is, I think, therefore I am, this is Descartes. I think, therefore I am. What did he mean by that? *He meant that, he could doubt everything around him. He could doubt that this was really a book case, he could doubt that he was really in the room now that I am talking to you. These are could doubt because maybe I am dreaming. But one thing I cannot doubt, Descartes said, is that I am doubting. And doubting, for Descartes, is a form of thinking. So, this becomes the bedrock for Descartes.* I think, therefore I am. So for Descartes, you can keep skepticism at bay. Keep skepticism at bay by the certainty of your own subjective thinking existence, doubting existence.

And on the basis of that clear certainty of my, of one's own existence, you build up other clear and distinct ideas. This is what he called the kind of bedrock of thinking on which you can then build secure notions of science, of calculation. Especially of mathematics, of optics. And you can keep skepticism at bay because you are building on something secure. 

Clear and distinct rational ideas that must be true because they are part of the apparatus of our thinking, the logic of, of our minds. So, that's Descartes on one side. 

On the other side, you have Locke in the English Enlightenment, if I can use this shorthand. He didn't say I feel, therefore I am, but he should have said that I guess. In other words, Locke thought what we get knowledge not by closing our eyes and thinking really hard about what must be true. *For Locke, we get our knowledge by, through experience. We want to know if this is real, we tap on it enough, we tap on it enough our hand starts hurting, gosh that's real.* We want, we, we, we get our knowledge by more and more sensation, by more and more experience, by more and more experiments. And so for Locke, the way you keep skepticism at bay is by piling up experience. Experience leading to knowledge. 

Now David Hume came along and close to Kant's time. *And argued that, well, experience didn't really give you knowledge. It really just gave you habit.* It just gave you customs that you got used to. So, I get used to this being hard. And that's all it is. It's just a custom. It's just a habit. It's not something with a foundation. And that's a new kind of almost we can call imperasist skepticism that really worried Kant. 

So when Kant was writing his major philosophical works, he was trying, he said, to steer a course between the rationalism of Descartes and the empiricism of Locke and Hume to, to actually make a place for clear and distinct ideas that you understand by really thinking hard, and also experience that you get from being out in the world and registering yours, these sensations. 

Kant said, I need to definitely create boundaries around reason to make room for faith. I need to steer a middle course. And Kant is an awfully complex thinker who wrote, who wrote mammoth works: The Critique of Pure Reason, The Critique of Practical Reason, The Critique of Judgment. These are his great major works, as well as a slew of other important essays, and so we can't go through them all here. And by any means, all I want to give you is one vehicle through which Kant steered this middle course. 

And that's what was his, really his two world theory. That is, for, for Kant, in order to have your cake and eat it, too, in order to have a belief in ideas as well as in experience, *all you had to do was to understand that we have knowledge of one side of the world. He called it the phenomenal side. And we have belief in things in themselves, things that not just as they appear to us but things in themselves, that he called the Noumenal Side.* 

So, the knowledge piece, the phenomenal piece for Kant was we, through, how we see the world, through what he called our categories of perception. I put my glasses on because for Kant, the world makes sense for us. We have knowledge of the world because our minds are, if you will, our glasses organize the world for us, in space-time categories, in other kinds of categories because *the world makes sense to us because our minds construct the world as a sensible place.* And then, we could actually understand the world and have rules about it because it's all organized for us, by our space-time glasses if you will. By our minds. Knowledge for Kant comes from our construction of the world as a sensible place. And that means we can make predictions, we can build bridges that don't fall down. We can make clocks that keep the right time.

All of this is about the phenomenal world. And then, some people come along and say, but is that the real world? Is that the deepest world? *And Kant says, well, I can't actually get my glasses off. I can't get, I can't see the world without my mind. But, I know there must be something there when my mind isn't seeing the world. This is the noumenal world.* The noumenal world. For Kant, that was the world of faith. The world where you believe in the immortality of the soul, your salvation, the love of God, the simple truth at peasants nose, Kant sometimes said. That's the noumenal world, the world of things in themselves. 

*You can't disprove that with science. You can't prove it with science either. It is the world of faith. The noumenal world is the world of faith, and the phenomenal world is the world of science.* They can coexist, Kant said. I, Kant, have steered a middle course between them. They both are valid. The enlightenment doesn't threaten faith because faith is about things in themselves. And nobody knows that for sure, but you can feel it as deeply as possible in your heart. And the phenomenal world is about things that we can test, things that we can calculate, things that we have organized through our minds, through our, if you will, space-time glasses. So in What is Enlightenment, Kant is writing having already done this philosophical groundwork, if you will. And having done that philosophical groundwork in the enlightenment kind of saying, we must liberate ourselves from immaturity. If you remember in the very beginning of what is enlightenment, *Kant says, enlightenment is man's release from his self incurred tutelage. And he says, dare to know, dare to know. Have the courage to use your own reason. That Kant says is the model of the enlightenment.* And for Kant, that means the enlightenment provides you with maturity, autonomy, the ability simply to think for yourself. And that for Kant is a precious intellectual and moral ability, moral capacity. Kant says in, in paragraph nine of What is Enlightenment?, the touchstone of everything that can be concluded as a law for a people lies in the question of whether the people could have enclosed such a law on itself."We'll talk about that next time, and I look forward to it.

## 1 - 2 - Philosophy, Modernity, and Intellectual History, part 2 of 2 (9_57)

Kant's Dare to Know leads him to make a political or at least quasi-political statement that he really does borrow from the works of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, as we'll see in subsequent lectures. 

_The touchstone of everything that can be concluded as a law for a people" lies in the question whether the people could have imposed such a law on itself. *A law would be legitimate only if people would impose that law on themselves. That is the core, the foundation of democracy.* - Kant_ 

That's why democracy is an outgrowth of, of Kant's thinking even though he himself was hardly a democrat because he would have been arrested. and he was a very cautious man. But would people impose the law of themselves? 

That's really important because it shows you two things about Kant. The first thing it shows you that he thinks that people should impose the laws on themselves, that in other words, they shouldn't just follow the law because somebody is making them do it. 

This goes back to Kant's categorical imperative, really. It's, it's not, if you do the right thing because somebody's forcing you to do it, that's no great, big deal. If you do the right thing because you know it's the right thing and you are acting in accordance with a law that you give yourself, that's a good thing. That's a moral thing. 

*In politics, following the law because the policeman is right behind you and, you know, you might get clubbed or something if you don't follow it, that's, that's, that's not a great thing. But if you follow the law because you give that law to yourself, you know it's the right thing to do.* That's the sign that you are enlightened. and as Rousseau will say, as we'll see later on, that's a sign of your freedom. That you're, you're obeying a law that you give yourself. The other thing to notice about this in Kant is that for Kant, it's really important that you will follow the law. In other words, he doesn't think that when you dare to know and you're independent as a thinker, that you're going to go wild and crazy. That actually, no. *If you're really thinking hard, if you're thinking clearly, you will realize that you want to live in the world where people behave in a certain way.* They behave according to universal laws that they themselves, they give to themselves. I mean, in simple terms, if you're stopped at a traffic light and there are no police around and there's no one else around. But you don't go through the red light because you decide you want to live in a society where people obey the rules. Then, you're, as Kant is saying, free. And you're enlightened. You're thinking for yourself. You're not just afraid to go through the red light because somebody might catch you, you have decided to live your life in accordance to, with a rule that you have given yourself. 

That is showing that you have entered this path, this path of enlightenment. The middle way for Kant is important, not just in philosophy. Remember, I said that contrast to steer a course between the rationalism of Descartes and the empiricism of Locke and Hume, but he also wants enlightenment to steer a middle course between obedience to the past and some wild revolution. Kant is no wild revolutionary. So, you see in the text that he says, men work themselves gradually out of barbarity if only intentional artifices are not made to hold them in it. 

So, what's intent, in other words, for Kant, again, in the middle course. On the one hand he's saying, don't put artifices in front of people to keep them ignorant. If you take away the obstacles, people will learn. But he also says, they'll learn gradually. *So, if you're an aristocrat or whose afraid that people might learn, Kant is saying get the obstacles out of the way, let them learn. But he's also saying, they will learn gradually. You don't have to worry about them learn.*

Kant, at the end of the essay, makes an appeal to the King Frederick the Great. He makes this appeal and saying to the, to the King and to the King's officials that you don't have to be afraid. As he says, argue as much as you will, about what you will, just obey the rules while you argue. And here is an important thing about Kant, what we call in this slide, the public and private use of reason. Kant says, that, that we in our private use of reason, when it is in our capacity where we are obeying an official above us. an officer of the state of the army, somebody who is our boss. And as he calls out our private use of reason, we actually can be limited. We we have to, we have to obey the people who give us orders. But as in, in our public user reason, that is as scholars who were, were thinking about scientific issues or investigating logical problems. 

As scholars we have to be free to think as we will so that we can make intellectual progress. Again, Kant is steering a middle course, he's telling the officials, don't worry, we will obey you and so far as, we are, have pledged to serve you. If you're my boss, I'm going to obey you. I can think about whether your order is rational, but I will obey you because that is my obligation. But if I write about this in the public sphere, then I should think clearly and logically whether you're right or wrong.

*Again, obedience on the one hand, freedom on the other. this is this is the Kant's typical move.* He is having two worlds. The noumena, remember that from the early part in the lecture, the things in themselves, and the phenomenal. *You can have noumena, you can have the faith. Things in themselves, phenomenal, you have reason. In politics you have obedience and you have free thinking. You have enlightenment but it's gradual.* So, Kant is a crucial figure in the enlightenment, crucial figure for modern philosophy because he actually thinks so clearly and logically, but for our purposes, he's also the thinker who says, modernity is here. You have to do something about it. You can't just try to keep modernity at bay. But if you do something about it rationally, if you do something about it prudently, modernity and enlightenment will not break down the order around us, it will not destroy our civilization as we know it. In fact, in the end, it will enhance that civilization. 

So, as we conclude with Kant, I have to remind you that Kant was an extraordinarily complex thinker, and we're just scratching the surface of his thought in, in this lecture and in this course. But for our purposes, I want you to remember this, that Kant strove to steer a middle course in the history of philosophy, that is, he wanted to preserve an ins, a, a concern with the ideal as well as the real. He wanted to make room for faith and have reason limited. He wanted enlightenment, but he wanted it gradual. Remember, we said that *Kant, through his critique of pure reason, established that we have firm knowledge but we have firm knowledge through our space time glasses through our minds of the world we create.* They have firm knowledge of that but it might not be the world in itself. The phenomenal world of which we have knowledge may, is different from the noumenal world which is what we just believe in with the simple faith, the simple faith of the common peasant or the common person. 

*Kant also said that you should dare to know, dare to know. Use your reason. Don't be immature for your whole life. But he said, when you dare to know and you leave your immaturity, you will do so gradually.* You'll still obey orders. You'll, you won't wreck the whole society. Enlightenment is something we can encourage but it's not something that will destroy the world as we know it, Kant said, we would really hope. A middle course. He embraced modernity because he didn't think modernity would go too quickly. Next time, we'll see how Jean-Jacques Rousseau who who wrote books that Kant loved and Kant was attracted to, how Jean-Jacques Rousseau takes a much more radical stands. Rousseau was much more harsh in his criticism of modernity. Rousseau was willing to say that modernity was a tremendous mistake and that we had to find a cure for modernity, not a way of encouraging its gradual development. We'll talk about that next time. I look forward to it.

## 2 - 1 - What is Enlightenment-, part 1 of 4 (15-06)

Kant was a big fan of Rousseau's. It's a curious thing because they were so different in temperament. Kant was the kind of guy that had such a regular life that people are said to have set their watches by that, you know, when, when he took his walk every day because he took it at exactly the same time. And the story goes that Kant one day didn't come out for his walk and everybody was shocked, they were worried about him. In his little village and they found out later on that he had received a book by Rousseau that day and he was so engrossed that he couldn't leave his chair. I don't know if that is true but it's a good story. 

Rousseau was an engrossing writer, an emotional writer. a man who wrote about being stirred by his passions, and and he stirred the passions of others as we'll see in the next few lectures. Our first text by Rousseau is called the often the first Discourse, it's the Discourse on, on the Arts and Sciences. And it is a great way to begin with Rousseau. Because it shows, what, most important thing for us in this course about John Jaques Rousseau, which is that he is the, the conscience of the enlightenment. Bad conscience of the enlightenment. He understand everything there is to understand about the enlightenment and he rejects it. He participates in the enlightenment and he turns against it. Rousseau is a thinker of, of radical contrasts, not trying steer a middle course. Not trying to steer a middle course like Conte but trying to dig to the bottom, and then often with extreme, extreme implications.

I, I, I wanted to just read you a little bit of, of, from Rousseau's confessions about How he decided, to write the First Discourse. He says, 

_One day I took the Mercure de France, and, that's a newspaper, and glancing through it as I walked, I came upon this question propounded, propounded by the Dijon Academy for the next year's prize. Here's the question, Has the progress of the sciences and arts done more to corrupt morals, or to improve them. The moment I read this, I beheld another universe, Rousseau wrote. And became another man. When I reached Vansend/g, he was going to Vansend to visit his sometimes friend Diderot, when I reached Vansend I was in a state of agitation bordering on delirium._

Rousseau says later that he was lost after he took this step because he became then a writer. He became a man of reflection and that, that for Rousseau means that he, he was no longer a natural man. We'll come back to that in subsequent lectures. But Rousseau is this, person of enthusiasms a person who embraces passion. even as he writes about the distortion. Of the passions.

So let's talk a little bit about the first discourse, today. The discourse on, the arts and sciences. Have the arts and sciences contributed to morals? Rousseau knew that everyone expected folks to write in and say oh, the arts and sciences they're doing great and they're helping us progress. They're helping us like the world better, be more at home in the world. As we've said that's what enlightenment is. Arts and sciences, what could be bad. And Rousseau say's quite the opposite. Very early in the discourse he says, while the government and the laws See to the safety and the well being of men assembled. The sciences, letters, and arts. Less despotic, and perhaps, more powerful. The sciences, and arts, and letters spread garlands of flowers over the iron chains with which they are laden. *The arts and sciences throttle our original freedom for which we seem born and they make us love our slavery. This is how they fashion us, Rousseau says, into civilized peoples.*

So here you have Rousseaus opening salvo. *The arts and sciences cover up our oppression, that's what they They do. They disguise our oppression. They make us forget that we're not free. Even worse, they make us love our slavery, Roseaux says.* The arts and sciences, don't promote knowledge and understanding, they promote tyranny and inequality. This is the argument of Rousseau's first discourse.

So, I never missed a class. I was so proud of this, cause I, and I loved school. I loved school. Here I am, I'm still in the same place, I love it. And I told my daughter one day, she was saying something, you know, I never missed a class and she said, Daddy, you weren't at college, you were in class. You, all you had was a classroom experience. You never had the real college experience. You, nerd. Your brother, Uncle Rick, he had a great time. He has friends from college. They still go out and party. You want to go to like, continuing education. I see a book because I really like that. And she said to me, make you love your slavery. They did a good job on you daddy.

How did they do that? *In a word, Rousseau says, the arts and science do this. They they create a disguise for our oppression. Because the arts and sciences create new needs. Create new forms of dependence.* Take a look at the footnote on five in the discourse on the arts and sciences. He writes, princes know that all needs which a people impose on itself are so many chains. Which it assumes. What yoke, Roseaux writes, could be imposed on men who need nothing. What yoke could be imposed on men who need nothing? So Roseaux's problem with the Arts and Sciences, is that they are luxurious, they have become luxuries. And as luxuries, they promote in us, new forms of dependence. We don't, need them to begin with, but once we have the Arts and Sciences, and if we're, then are deprived of them at some point, we feel pain, we feel we're missing something. 

And for Roseaux, this creation of new needs, new vulnerability, New dependencies is a form of degradation, not progress. Arts and science modernity, enlightenment as forms of degradation and corruption. From the first discourse again, what conclusion is to be drawn, what conclusion is to be drawn. From this paradox so worthy of being born in our time; and what will become of virtue when one has to get rich at all costs? The ancient political thinkers, Rosseau wrote, here's our key sentence. *The ancient political thinkers forever spoke of morals and virtue; ours speak only of commerce. And money. So Rousseau's criticism of enlightenment and the arts and sciences become criticism of luxury.*

And then they become a criticism of the economic relationships of his time, Remember in Rousseau's writing in 18th century France, the three estates, The clergy, the aristocracy, and then the peasants. The peasants making up, and the middle class, really, in that third estate, making up the vast majority of the population. A whole system built on inequality.

And what Rousseau is saying in the first discourse, is that the arts and sciences end the Enlightenment, by implication actually disguise this inequality. Making us suffer more from it, because we don't see it clearly. *So Rousseau goes back in the first discourse to talk about, human beings prior to their corruption by the arts and the sciences. and he, he writes that in those good old days, in those good old days we were simpler. We were content to be more honest with one another.* Because we didn't have all of these disguises, to deceive ourselves, and our fellow man.

In paragraph 53, in paragraph 53, Rousseau writes about this relationship of learning and luxury. I quote from him again. What gives rise to all of these abuses, Rousseau writes, if not the fatal inequality introduced among men By the distinction of talents, and the disparagement of the virtues. This is the most obvious effect, the most obvious effect, of all of our studies. And the most dangerous in its consequences. The most dangerous in its consequences. Because what happens, Rousseau says. 

*When you have Enlightenment, you have the arts and sciences making so called progress. Is, you get some people who seem to be really smart, and other people who aren't so smart. You begin to get some people who look up to the writer, the philosopher, the scientist. And say, oh, I wish I could be like that. And for Rousseau, at that moment, you have introduced a whole form of corruption.* That it's going to be a slippery slope for human beings because they will try to be someone they are not. They will try to be someone they are not and for Rousseau that is a form of dishonesty. And he says writers get into this mode all the time. Scientists thinkers get into this mode all the time. They are performing for someone else. They are creating luxuries introducing inequality, and under the guise of promoting knowledge they are promoting a kind of dishonesty we might call today inauthenticity. They are not being themselves. 

So Rousseau's first discourse A radical text in enlightenment because he's not defending the status quo and I think this is really important and I want to make sure I get this clear to you because *there are plenty of people in the 18th century who don't like the enlightenment, they say, we don't want the people to learn.* We don't want the people to be educated. They can't handle it. They can't handle the truth. So they, we want to, we want ourselves to keep the power because we're so good. We're the aristocrats we're the monarchies officers. We're, we're the rich and powerful. We deserve our powers and our privileges they say. The enlightenment is too dangerous they say. Or they say we can't have the enlightenment because the enlightenment is eroding faith. And we want more religion. We want more faith. We want more belief. We don't want questioning they say. These are enemies of the enlightenment.

And that Rousseau comes along and he's an enemy of the enlightenment but he his not conservative like those other folks. He does not want to preserve the status quo. He isn't saying the enlightenment's not radical enough. *The enlightenment's not radical enough, Rosseau is saying.* The enlightenment is actually disguising oppression under the guise of offering us more freedom and autonomy. *So what we're so saying is you guys in the enlightenment think you're actually disturbing the status quo, but you are promoting the most important ingredient in the status quo, which is inequality. The taste for luxury. The demand for, for distinction which leads to inauthenticity and dishonesty. This, he says, is the slippery slope of modernity.* We're getting further and further away from who we naturally should be, who we are by nature.

Now, we get to the, the last section of the first discourse, which is such a surprise. It really as you read this you hear all this radical talk. About the corruption through modernity and the slippery slope of enlightenment. You get to the end of the first discourse and his recommendation is really is, is, is, is really a surprise. That is, in the end, he says let learned men of the first rank find honorable asylum in the courts of kings. Learned men of the first rank should be brought in to the political establishment. He's just told us why inequality is so bad, how we have to slippery slope of enlightenment. *In the end, what he says is the cure. I actually have to give the smart people power.* Why does he say that? Well, you could be skeptical and say, well, because he wants a job, right? He wants to get into the the mix. I don't think that's accurate. and it's certainly not generous. 

What Rousseau is saying at the end, is something that we will be consistent about as we'll see in his other discourses. Which is, you can't go backwards, you can't go back to where you were before. *You can't strip off your enlightenment and go backwards. So this is the diasese, the cure, is to use learned men, to try to institute political change. That would at least be less dishonest than having learned men on the outside of power just making fun of the people with power but not actually doing anything about it.* Bring power and education together, Rosseau was saying. That's the best hope we can, we have. But I want to emphasise this that is that, that, that Rousseau is a diagnostician more than he is a a, a physician who treats something. He diagnoses the problem, that is what his contribution is most centrally. In this text the last part seems less satisfying at least to me than the diagnosis. The treatment is given very quickly. and, and it's, it's not sketched out very much at all. It's not his job. What his job was, was to show you what you think you were so proud of, what you think was so great about modernity, what you think was so great about education is actually making us worse. That's his warning. That's his critique. That's a lot. And we should be grateful for it, I think.

## 2 - 2 - What is Enlightenment-, part 2 of 4 (15-16)

So today, we're going to go onto Rousseau's second discourse, the Discourse on the Origins of Inequality. you'll see that this is a, a more political work. a work in which Rousseau sketches out the origins of political society.

He says, _"For all the rest of the day, wandering deep into the forest, I sought and I found the vision of those primitive times, the history of which I proudly traced." I, Rousseau, I demolish the petty lies of mankind. I dare to strip man's nature naked to follow the progress of time and trace the things which have distorted it. And by comparing man as he had made himself with man as he is by nature I showed him in his pretended perfection, to the true source of his misery. That's the key. I showed him in his pretended perfection, progress the true source of his misery. Exalted by these sublime meditations my soul soared toward Divinity. And from whose height I looked down on my fellow men, pursuing their blind path of their prejudice, as there are errors in there, misfortunes, and there are crimes. I cried to them, he says, in a voice they could not hear. Madmen who ceaselessly complain of nature. learn that all your misfortunes, all your misfortunes arise from yourselves. Madmen, don't blame nature,. It is your cells, your distance from nature, your corruption of nature, which is your problem."_

This is the beginning of the second discourse. That was just how Rousseau described. Writing a second discourse in his confessions. *You can't have coherent thinking without an idea of nature cuz you need nature to do something.* You need, the idea of nature does work. And everyone who says, Rousseau, the Rousseauians claim everyone who says they no longer have a concept of nature, they're beyond that, they've troubled it, they've critiqued it, they've dialectically negated it. All of them are hypocritical or just not very smart from the Rousseau perspective. They have an idea of nature, they just don't want to show what it is. Because without an idea of nature, you can't have a place from which to critique the things that are your enemies. Tour, the things you don't like. 

This is the Rousseauian view. Without some, place from which you criticize You have no, leverage for critique. So, you can for example, and this is very much in Rousseau's mind, you can't have an idea of corruption. Unless you have an idea of nature. So if you say this politician in Chicago is corrupt, and someone says to you oh, my God you have never been to Chicago. That's like saying the sun is hot. What you're saying is that it is natural in Chicago for politicians to be corrupt, right? That it's just what people do in Chicago. That's the nature of the Chicago politics. 

In Rosseau's preface to his Second Discourse, the On the Origins of Inequality, he says there is, I sense, an age at which the individual human being Would want to stop. You will seek the age at which you wish your species had stopped. And what he means by that is the good parts of our nature have begun to flower but the evils parts have not yet found development or the corruption has not yet set in. And he says when we look at that period. When we are on the cusp of corruption but not yet there, in other words we have begun to show our potential for good but not for evil, he says "This sentiment that arises must serve as praise of your first ancestors." The criticism of your contemporaries, and the dread of those who will have the misfortune to come after you. 

I'm paraphrasing, I think, at the end there. so, it, it is meant, Rousseau's picture of the natural, of this point in our history and when there was a balance in our lives, that is meant as a criticism of the present and a warning about the future. 

*Rousseau says early on in the second discourse that there are two principles prior to reason: one is interest in self-preservation, and the second is the natural repugnance at seeing another sentient being suffer.* And now the interest in self preservation's pretty clear. When in danger, we wanna, we wanna take care of ourselves. You know, so if we see a scary thing we flee. or if we have to, we fight. But Rousseau thinks most of the time we can escape. We can hide, ww can get away. We try to take care of ourselves, we try, to keep ourselves alive. 

The second one, the most interesting perhaps is because the natural repugnance at seeing ascension being suffer. He talks about how an animal, if it passes another animal who is dying on the road or in the woods. we'll kind of shy away, right, we'll move away cuz it, it's, it's natural a version to see any other creature with feelings, suffer. And that second piece is going to be very important for Rousseau. It's really the, at the core of where morality comes from. not wanting to see another sentient being, not a human being necessarily but any, Any creature with feelings to see that creature suffer. 

Rousseau gets off some barbs against his fellow intellectuals early on in the second discourse. *He writes, most of our ills are of our own making. We would get rid of most of all of them if we would retain the simple, uniform and solitary way of life described to us by nature.* If it is destined for us to be healthy Then, I almost dare assert, here is the barb, the state of reflection is a state against nature. The state of reflection is a state of, against nature. And the man who meditates, Rousseau writes, the man who meditates is a depraved animal, and some of his friendly actually thought that he was thinking about them when he wrote that, and of course readers for the last couple hundred years or so said, well Rosseau himself then would fall into that category. 

And the answer is, of course, he knows he's a person who meditates. He doesn't think he's pure. He doesn't think he's living the natural life. He is a person of reflection, but his reflection is meant to move him away from this pursuit of progress which is in fact resultant pursuit of perversion or corruption. Resource picture of early human beings is one where human beings are much closer to other animals then they are when we get civilized.

So in those early days, we're pre-family, we're pre-romantic attachments and You, we're really pre-social attached, where people encounter fortuitously and then they go on their way, they go on their way, but there is in even in these early days that notion of the aversion of seeing another creature suffer, that leads to what we so called compassion. Sometimes he calls it pity, he says pity is a disposition suited to being as weak and subject to as so many ills as we are. A virtue all the more universal and useful as is precedes of all reflection in him. In him. So the natural beast themselves sometimes show evident signs of it, of pity that is. 

This is very important because for Rousseau, pity precedes reflection. We don't care about somebody else's suffering because we think about it. We care about it because of an intinctual, an instinctive. Natural reaction and pity compassion is not dependent on our appreciation of the status of the other who's, who's suffering. We feel just naturally that fact that they suffer is all we need to know. The fact that they are in pain is all we need to care about in order for that instinct, that natural feeling of pity to kick in.

Why is this so important? *Why is he talking about this in an essay on the origins of inequality? Because it's inequality that makes us more and more strangers to one another. It's inequality that creates a dynamic That's not based in self preservation and compassion. it's inequality that actually creates a dynamic of further and further separation of human beings from one to the other and also, increases our, satisfaction at seeing other people suffer.* That's the great perversion that goes along with inequality and we'll get to that in a few minutes. *That is, that with, inequality, we feel if we have more stuff, we feel superior because we see other people who suffer. Are own pleasure is augmented by the difference we have from those who are poorer than we are.* We'll get to that in a minute, but that's why Rousseau is linking pity, this natural instinct, to inequality because inequality reduces the opportunities for compassion and increases the opportunities for the infliction of pain. 

Inequality, Rousseau underscores. is depe, increased by society. *In the woods, in the forests, in the nuh, state of nature when we, we're, we're are all not the same, but we don't compare ourselves one to the other.* That's so important for Rousseau. When you just run away from people. You climb a tree and hide. Or you do something so you're not constantly in comparison. You are not measuring yourself against another, you are off to the next encounter. Only when you are in society when people start looking at each other trying to be someone else for another, act for another, only in such a situation will inequality really begin to increase in dynamic fashion. 

He says that it will be evident how much smaller the difference between man and man must be in the state of nature than in the state of society. And how much natural inequality in the human species must increase as a result of instituted inequality. Notice that. *Natural inequality in the human species must increase as a result of instituted inequality.* That's really important for me. So, we'd layer on inequalities in, in society. And so, we're Rousseau in, having set off some of these or set out some of these Marker is about, what is a natural human being. What are some of the instinctive components of human beings. 

This is in Part one. *In Part two, he really turns to the origins of society. There is, of course, inequality in the priest society stage. That is, some people are faster than others, some people are taller than others, some people are stronger. But it doesn't matter so much, cuz we don't compare ourselves to one to the other, cuz we're not living in proximity, we don't have relationships.* Only in society. Do we create a dynamic of inequality? And so, the first sentence of part two of the discourse is, the first man who, having enclosed a piece of ground, to whom it occurred to say, this is mine, and found people sufficiently simple to believe him, was the true founder of civil society. So the true founder of civil society is the person who creates property. See that? He puts a, a stick in the ground and says, this is mine, and then got other people to recognize that, stupid enough, simple enough to believe him. That is the founder of civil society. Hardly heroic, it's, someone who pulls the wool over others, the eyes of other people. That's all we have time for today we'll, we'll pick things up next time when we move on, along the syllabus to the next set of readings. See you then.

## 2 - 3 - What is Enlightenment-, part 3 of 4 (14-30)

So Rousseau is, is tracing this origin of society and he begins to sketch out in the second part what it was like when, when we, people first began living together and he says the following. Everything begins to change in appearance. The more they see each other, we see each other really, human beings. The more they see each other, the less they can do without seeing one another still more. And for Rousseau, that's both a sweet thing, and of course a very dangerous thing. *The more they see one another, the less they can do without seeing one another still more. A tender and sweet sentiment steals into the soul, and at the least obstacle becomes an impetuous frenzy. Jealousy awakens together with love. In other words, we want to see one another, and then, what if the other person is wanting to see us, etc. Discord triumphs, and the greatest of all passion receives sacrifices of human blood.* 

So, you know, for Rousseau, it's, we start to live together and then, we start to want each other, and when we want each other, that's sweet and lovely but it also breeds conflict. And then the Rousseauian theme of, of, of how we we speak and to look at each other. *And as we look at each other, we begin to act for the other, so that we appear the way we think, we want to appear the way we, want to be seen, which is a departure from how we just act naturally.* Let me give you Rousseau's sentence. Everyone began to look at everyone else, and this is really, really bad. *Everyone began to look at everyone else and to wish to be looked at himself, and public esteem acquired a value.* 

And for Rousseau, this is very dangerous. The fermentation caused by these new leavens eventually produce compounds fatal to happiness and innocence. *Because when we begin to want to appear in a certain way for the other, we begin to be fakers, we begin to be hypocrites. We begin to, to leave who we really were and begin to try to be something for somebody else. And as inequality goes along its route, goes along its dynamic, we begin to imitate people who we think of as our betters, thereby becoming less and less like our true selves.* 

And so for Rousseau, it's fine to have a self-love in the sense of wanting to preserve yourself, in the sense of wanting to protect your life and to, and have the sense of self-preservation, but what is born here is vanity, because we begin again to want to be someone who we are not just so we can please another. and what happens, as this goes on, as we begin to act for someone else, that's another way to think of it, think, we become comedic, we become actors, we try to act for someone else. We, we think we need things. We think we need certain goods, we think we need certain, accoutrements, a certain, luxuries, if you will. We, we think we need them, and that, they don't seem like luxuries anymore. We need those things to be who we think we are, and for Rousseau, this means that conveniences become needs. That is, the things we, that we just acquired, because they were fun to have, or we liked having them, those things now become necessities. We begin, oh, I can't live without that. You know, I can't live without my fancy white shirt, I can't live without my fancy boots, etc., etc. *The things that were at one point luxuries or conveniences now become needs. Rousseau puts it this way. Since these conveniences, by becoming habitual had almost entirely ceased to be enjoyeable, and at the same time degenerated into true needs, it became much more cruel to be deprived of them than to possess them was sweet, and men were unhappy to lose them without being happy to possess them.* 

This is key for Rousseau. So in this society where you begin to act for another person, you say, well, I need new cufflinks, or I need a new tie, or I need, and then you say, but once you have it, you think, well, you know, I used to have this tie, it doesn't really give me any pleasure to have the tie anymore. But when I lost the tie, I couldn't find the tie, that really hurts. That really, I really hate that. so when you, the, the, the dynamic here is that you desire something, and when you get it doesn't, after awhile you don't get any pleasure from it, but if you lose it, if you lose it, it causes you pain. And what happens here then is you become more vulnerable to pain. 

As you acquire luxuries, you become more vulnerable to pain, because the luxuries you acquire, after a while you get, just get habituated to them. They become just part of your life, and you don't get pleasure from them. But if somebody takes it, or, or somebody scratches it, or somebody damages it, that hurts. And that, for Rousseau, that increased vulnerability goes along with this increased hypocrisy and all of it is stimulated by this dynamic of inequality. 

Rousseau talks though, before he, shows how the slippery slope of inequality accelerates. he does pause to say, there is a moment before, vanity gets too bad, before luxuries kick in too much, although men now had less endurance, and natural pity had already undergone some modification, this period in the development of the human faculties occupying a just mean between indolence and the primitive state and the petulant activity of our vanity, must have been the happiness, happiest and the longest lasting epoch. *Rousseau calls this the youth of the world. When our human faculties had, had already been modified some, but there is, he says, a just mean between indolence of the primitive state, and the petulant activity of our vanity.* In other words, vanity isn't too bad, luxury isn't too bad, and there's a sweetness of social relations. 

That, for him, is, kind of, our adolescence whene things really were in sync before we began to slide down the slippery slope of inequality, vanity and hypocrisy. what really pushes us down that slope is the state, is the origin of the state. and you see this in the last sections or the second half of the, of, of, of part 2. the state becomes the guarantor of the process of inequality. *Lacking valid reasons to justify and sufficient strength to defend himself, the rich, under the pressure of necessity at last conceived the most well-considered project ever to enter man's mind.* The rich conceive of this project, that's important. So, the state is a product of the wealthy man's mind, to use even his attackers' forces in his favor, to make his adversaries his defenders, to instill in them other maxims, and to give them different institutions is favorable to himself, as natural right was contrary to him. *In other words, the rich create a scheme to get the poor to defend property. If you can get the poor to defend property via the state. It's police forces, it's armies, then the rich benefit from the political arrangement that guarantees their own superiority in in conditions of inequality. The state therefore, according to Rousseau, is created to keep the wealthy, wealthy, and to keep the poor, poor.* 

Now this is a radical thing to say anytime, really, but especially in the eighteenth century when the society is built on inequality. Remember that, we have the three estates, right? The clergy, the nobility and the peasants, who were middle classes, and so inequality is built into the state. *And Rousseau says the state is there, not to protect the peasants and the middle class people, the state is there to guarantee that the wealthy can still lord over the rest of us.* All ran head long into their chains, in the belief that they were securing their freedom. They ran, we ran headlong into our chains in the belief that we were securing our freedom. For while they had enough reason to sense the advantages, of political establishment, they had not enough experience to foresee its dangers. Now Rousseau here is arguing against, the social contract theorists who say, well, the state was created because people exchange a portion of their freedom for security. Rousseau says, no we don't need security, we without property. The people who need security are the rich people. 

*They duped the rest of us into supporting a state that protects inequality. And inequality means for Rousseau, the wealthy protect their property via political arrangements. And this allows not only for the perpetuation of their superior social and economic status, but it creates a situation where the rest of society em, wants to emulate the rich, tries to become rich, corrupting themselves even further.* So on the one hand, they suffer because they're poor, and then they suffer in the soul because they, they, they think that the, the key to salvation is the acquisition of wealth, that is, becoming superior to other people. 

Rousseau has very many pointed things to say about the wealthy classes of his time. The rich being so speak, so to speak, sensitive in every part of their goods. It was much easier to hurt them, and that they consequently had to take more precautions to protect themselves. What he's saying here is rich people are sensitive, are so sensitive, because you can hurt, they, they protect their fancy cars, in our time, they protect their fancy castles, they protect their fancy clothes. They, anything you, they have so many ways in which they, they, they have, have invested in luxuries that they are sensitive in all, every part of their goods. My favorite sentence, I was going to wait til next time, my favorite sentence in the reading for this week is from the second discourse, he says, *rich people are so sensitive. They had feelings in all of their possessions. Now, it's a great insight, is that what had been kind of a, a cool thing then becomes a necessity.* 

You know, I, I had a, a, my first car was a Chevy Nova, which my father got from a guy who owed him a favor. I never really understood, if I was, like, stopped by a cop, if I'd, you know, go to jail. Anyway, it was an old car when I got it. And it had lots of nicks in it, right, you know? And so I would drive around, I was a maniac, because I didn't care if I hit anything. Because, the car was that kind of car, that you liked another dent, cool, you know. So, you know, and so I was driving around, and, and then I, and, and I, and so I would come out in the morning and, somebody might say, oh man there's a new scratch on your car. Yeah, okay. That was my Nova.

Then, when I came to Wesleyan, I got myself a green Camaro. It was, neat car, used auto, it was pretty old also, but it was pretty cool. And I would park it over there by Alpha Del. And in those days what is now the Social Justice House, was the, the most, how should I put this? it was a fraternity for people who were on the fifth string of the football team. lets say, Chi Psi, they were called. They used to beat us up all the time, which we thought was a sign of our moral, moral purity. but I would park my green Camaro in the parking lot, I'd come out in the morning and then, is it okay? Is there a scratch in it? I had feelings in my possession. Right? 

The Nova had those windows with the crank. You know? And then my Camaro had a push button window thing that never worked. But I had feelings in my push button window. *They had feelings on all our possessions. And so what's, what, what happens with luxuries is they quickly becoming something that you need. Arts and sciences for Rousseau are divorced from our needs because they become ornamental. And so for Rousseau I become more vulnerable. With every luxury that I acquire and that I let become a necessity I become more sensitive, that is, more vulnerable, and I need more cops, I need more armies, officers, I need more, informants to watch my stuff, because I don't want anything to happen to my stuff. And so the rich create an apparatus of control of police, of government, to protect their stuff. And the rest of us buy into it because we want to have stuff too. We want to have stuff, and that corrupts us, because it's not a natural desire, it is a desire from our vanity. That we want to lord it over someone else, just like those, rich guys lord it over us.* I think that's, that's all we have time for today. We'll, we'll, pick things up next time, when we move the, the longer syllabus to the next set of readings. See you then.

## 2 - 4 - What is Enlightenment-, part 4 of 4 (16-24)

As Rousseau winds this argument to its conclusion, he talks about our natural love of freedom, which really rebels against the situation of inequality. *Man's natural dispositions for or against servitude must therefore not be judged by the degradation of enslaved peoples but by the prodigious feats of all free peoples to protect themselves against oppression.* This is on page 187, and he's responding to the folks who say, oh, Rousseau, but everybody lives in this society. Everybody lives in this, under a government, and they're not fighting against the government. They're not fighting against the situation. 

And he says, don't judge people by the corrupt, perverted populous, that is docile about inequality and desires wealth. Find, show the examples of people who risk their lives to protect their freedom, who risk their lives to protect their, equality, or he says, even, go to the zoo, and see how animals just, I hate captivity, and he uses the example of of an animal that smashes its head against the bars of the cage, because it can't stand not being free. *Now we have gotten used to our unfreedom and that is not a sign that unfreedom is natural or that our situation is natural.* It's a sign that we have become perverted, and our natural love of freedom is disappearing. 

*A sign of this perversion is so is that rich people, he says, are happy because of the existence of the poor. That the wealth itself doesn't mean that much to them, but what means something to them is that they could look at other people and feel superior to them.* If one sees a handful of powerful and rich men at the pinnacle of greatness and fortune while the masses crawl in obscurity and misery, it is because the former value the things they enjoy only to the extent that the others, the poor, are deprived of them. And they would cease to be happy if, without any change in their own state, the people cease to be miserable. That is, it's seeing the misery of other people, which gives the wealthy people a sense of satisfaction. 

So he, he was invited to a, a party, and the, the entertainment at the end of the party was that the huge banquet. It would have these tables laden with food to big for their eyes, too large for their appetites. So afterwards all the, the aristos, the aristocrats go outside, and they see the peasants who are living at the edge of starvation and they take bread and they just throw, throw the bread at the peasants and just watch them scramble and try to grab them. That was amusing, and Rousseau's, you know he says, then he writes to us, I can't believe I was there. I am such a hypocrite, I am such an awful person. Let me tell you about it, reader. Yet, then he says, why do this people behave this way? They, the richer people after all. Why do they behave this way? Because they only like having that much food because the other people are starving. Nobody really like this stuff there. You, they don't like it that much. They learned to like it because, they say, oh I can eat this and those people can't. And for Rousseau, this is a great sign, awful signt of our corruption.

And that leads to, what for him, is this existential situation, where we live outside of ourselves. The genuine cuase of all these differences, is that the savage man lives in himself. Sociable man, Rousseau writes, always outside himself. *The sociable man is capable of living only in the opinion of others, and so to speak, derives the sentiment of his own existence solely from their judgement. He's critiquing the rich, for their, sadism, really, and, and getting satisfaction from, from the existence of poverty, but he's critiquing the whole society for creating the conditions for vanity and hypocrisy so that we live outside ourselves.* We want to be seen in a certain way by other people. It is manifestly against the Law of Nature, however defined, that a child command an old man, an imbecile lead a wise man, and a handful of people abound in superfluities, while the starving multitude lacks the necessities. This is for him, against the law of nature. the society that he lives in. Remember, society is still built on divine right of kings, a society built on this kind of baked in, natural, they called natural inequality. 

Rousseau says, this whole society is illegitimate, because it's a violation of who we are as human beings, that the imbecile leads the rest. That's that's pretty damning, and you can see why Rousseau was was a shocking writer, to the, society around him. I want to pull, this to a close by just, giving you some reactions to Rousseau. just starting off with Voltaire, who, who read Rousseau, and sent him a letter, after reading his Second Discourse, which enraged Rousseau. You'll see why. 

Voltaire writes, _I have received, sir, your new book against the human species. Okay, just saying alright. Your new book against the human species, and I thank you for it. No one has ever been so witty as you are in trying to turn us into brutes. To read your book makes one long to go on all fours. Since, however, it is now some 60 years since I gave up that practice, I feel it is unfortunately impossible for me to resume it. I leave this natural habit to those more fit for than you or I._

In other words, Voltaire is saying, come on, Rousseau. We don't go back to being children, or the youth of the world. You don't go back to crawling around on all fours. Don't show us to the brutes. Voltaire is thinking, Rousseau, who calls us hypocrites, is himself being hypocritical. And Rousseau was outraged, and you can read his reactions to Voltaire who he hated deeply after this encounter.

Others later after Rousseau's death, will take Rousseau as having shown them the true way for true freedom. And the scariest of this, perhaps one of the most important, happens in the French Revolution, during the Reign of Terror, when Robespierre, who was, was called the incorruptible, Incorruptible. *Robespierre led the committee of public safety and said we have to stamp out inequality. We have to create virtue through equality, and that meant, virtue through equality meant, you kill the people who are standing out. You execute the people who are different, to create homogeneity, to create equality, which meant for Robespierre, to create virtue.* Now Rousseau didn't say to do this, but Robespierre thought this was the lesson from Rousseau. A kind of what would later be called totalitarianism, what Hegel called the pursuit of absolute freedom through violence. 

Robespierre wrote, _what is the end of our revolution? The tranquil enjoyment of freedom and equality, the reign of that eternal justice, the laws of which are graven not on marble or stone, but in the hearts of men, even in the heart of the slave who has forgotten them, and in that of the tyrant who disowns them. We wish in a word, to fulfill the intentions of nature. We wish to realize the promises of philosophy, and acquit providence of a long reign of crime and tyranny. That France, once illustrious among enslaved nations, may, by eclipsing the glory of all free countries that have ever existed, become a model to the nations._

That's what they want, that's what Robespierre wants, a terror to oppressors, and a consolation to the oppressed. That is our ambition. We'll seal the work with out blood, Robespierre says. So, he is inspired by Rousseau to, institute, through the Committee on Public Safety what becomes known, of course, as the Reign of Terror. Now, I'm not saying of, I want it to be clear that this is, you know, Rosseau's responsibility, or that Rousseau, this is a correct reading of Rousseau. But Rousseau did inspire strong reactions, and continues to do so. 

So I'll give you another reaction to Rousseau, this one by Edmund Burke, whose reflections on the revolutions in France is a hallmark of conservative thinking. For Burke, Rousseau was evil because he offered a theoretical notion of freedom. That is, a freedom that was conceptually pure, and therefore would be imposed on a people by intellectuals or by rulers who thought they were following a recipe or theory. For Burke, this was the great error of the French Revolution, that they were inspire, that the revolutionaries thought they could change the world through ideas, that they put into practice, or rather than seeing how politics should emerge organically through the lives of a society, through the developments of a culture. For Burke, politics could not be theoretical without becoming violent and cruel, and Rousseau, Burke thought, offered a theory of politics when what you really wanted to have Was an organic development of the political that was in sync with religion, with habit, with custom and with aspirations for change. 

Later in the 19th century Tocqueville, another thinker often used by, in conservative circles Tocqueville wrote in the Old Regime, and the Revolution, that the French people were guided by two major principles. That is the, the desire for equality, and the desire for freedom. And for Tocqueville, the history of France, was the history of trying to reconcile these two desires, one for equality, and one for freedom. *And so, for Tocqueville, the urge for equality led to tyranny. So he thought, that against Rousseau, that when you try to institute equality, you, what you realize is you need a stronger and stronger government to institute the equality.* Now Rousseau thought the government was there to promote inequality. And Tocqueville reverses this and says, well actually what we need now if we're going to have more equality, which the French people sometimes seem to want in the 19th century with this obstinate zeal, he says, that you would need a strong government to redistribute wealth, and you need despotism to institute equality. This is against the legacy of Rousseau that Tocqueville was writing. and finally, I thought I'd end again with another conservative thinker. 

We don't, we don't read too many conservative thinkers, or I should say, these are thinkers that are used by conservatives. They, they actually not, maybe not themselves conservatives thinkers, but Leo Strauss who was German and American political theorist writes in Natural Right and History, that Rousseau's thesis that man is by nature good, must be understood in the light of his contention that man is by nature, sub-human. Man is by nature good because he is by nature that sub-human being, which is capable of becoming either good or bad. There is no natural constitution of man to speak of, in Rousseau. Man is by nature almost infinitely perfectible. So what Strauss sees in Rousseau is that the concept of nature in Rousseau is one that already has, kind of, historical prejudices built into it, so that for Rousseau, we are perfectible creatures, and corruptible ones, and that is not the same as, figuring on a stable concept the nature because Rousseau's natural human, as Strauss says is sub, is, is sub human or proto human and as he's, he's going to change. He is capable of, of perfectibility or of corruption. 

*The error of what Strauss sees in Rousseau, is that, thinking you have a national standard, when what you really have is a framework, for thinking about how human beings will change, rather than a standard that allows you to judge human actions.* 

So Rousseau's legacy is long and it's deep. He institutes a mode of thinking, that challenges his contemprorary society, by saying that, the, dynamics that we see, in, what looks like progress, are really corruption. That what the, that we see greater inequality protected by the state, that vanity and hypocrisy keep us from knowing what human beings are really like. That and, and that is key for for us as we, as we move through the course. 

*For Rousseau, the really real is this notion of human beings as having these two principles prior to reason. the principle of self-preservation, the principle of pity. and that is the core of his thinking. and when he looks around him in the 18th century, he says I don't see these principles at work. They're hidden beneath layers of hypocrisy, layers of con, of, of, of, of vanity. And Rousseau, as a modern thinker, says, where is the real human beings in modernity?* I'm looking around here and I see you know, somebody who thinks he's a baker, I see someone who thinks he's a, aristocrat, I see someone who thinks he's a politician. I see, another person who thinks, he's smarter than everybody else. But, where are they, where are the real human beings in there? What I see are layers and layers of, of, of corruption. That is, layers of acting for other people. I, Rousseau, want to strip away, those things, to see what people really are. And he, he looks around and sees that, and then he also sees that everything that people are celebrating is modern and progressive in his culture. Those are the things that are leading to more and more vanity and hypocrisy.

So, Rousseau's uses the modern tool, tools of the Enlightenment to see through this hypocrisy, but he also turns against modernity in the Enlightenment in calling for an end to this, what he thinks of as, as modernity's pursuit of vanity. and, and its pursuit, of luxury and, and, inequality. We'll see, next time, in, in Marx, that to critique of inequality, in the nineteenth century, accelerates, as, thinkers begin to try and understand, not just how we pretend to be for others, how we act for others, but they try to understand the new conditions of labor, the new conditions of work that come along with the Industrial Revolution. Rousseau is there at the cusp, just before the Industrial Revolution kicks in, but at a point when modernity is getting to define itself. we'll see, as we move through the course. that taking into account, industrialization, and the, and the development of the modern city, will be the task that our subsequent thinkers take on. We'll see you then.

## 3 - 1 - From Enlightenment to Revolution, part 1 of 5 (11_43)

Last time, we talked about Jean Jacques Rousseau and his views of inequality. You may remember that we ended up last time, discussing some other reactions to Rousseau, ranging from the hilarious response to Voltaire, which was to say, Mr. Rousseau, you give me the urge to get down on all fours and crawl around like a baby. But, come on, give me a break. he gave that up a long time ago. 

Rousseau, of course is outraged by that. then later on after Rousseau's death, he's taken up by Robespierre in the Reignt of Terror. The, who's the, the radicals of, of the Jacobin during the French Revolution, take Rousseau to be their guide. They, they read Rousseau as saying we must squash out impurity. We must, we must support virtue and the most important thing we have to do to create a new society is radicals from, in 1793 said, the most important thing we have to do is to get rid of inequality. Get rid of difference. ale, everything the same. So, freedom and equality fighting against each other. Because when there are free people, of course, differences emerge. 

We also talked a little bit about Tocqueville, much later into the 19th century, who saw this battle between freedom and equality as being a driving force in French history, in French society, throughout the modern period. He says it looks, when you read French history, Tocqueville says, *it looks like people are struggling against authority, but really it's a struggle between freedom and equality, the desire to let people do what they want and the desire to keep everybody the same*. The, this, this conflict one can see down until our own time. 

Today we move further along in time and we move towards Central Europe when we look at the work of Karl Marx. Now, many of you will have opinions about Karl Marx, because Karl Marx and and his colleague Engels are seen as the fathers of Communism. And Communism is a word that stirs great passions in the 20th century because it resulted in enormous journey and great suffering across the world but Marx is not the leader of a communist state in the 20th century. He is not the person who runs a government in one part of the world or another Marx for us in this class is a thinker who identified some of the, key problems of modernity and tried to access modernity through a foundation of sorts. We'll talk about that later. a concept that would allow him to clarify modernity, so that he could promote, its change. 

And Rousseau, that concept for clarifying modernity was the state of nature. The state of nature that Rousseau talk about inequality as a form of corruption. For Marx, the concept will turn out to be much later in his work, the economic base or economic injustice. So that will allow him to mount a critique of capitalism as we'll see in subsequent lectures. 

Today however, I want to give you some background to Marx, because the reading I've asked you to do today is from his early work. Sometimes called, philosophical manuscripts. It's work on alienation, on what the translators in english sometimes call self-estrangement. *How is it, Marx wants to know, how is it that in modern society the things we do make us feel less like ourselves. How is it, Marx wants to know that the work we engage in feels like somebody else's work. Even the things we make feel as if they've been made by and for someone else. That, that's Marx's problem.* So we start today trying to trace the path from Marx's teacher to these early texts. Marx's teacher being Friedrich Hegel, Georg Friedrich Hegel. 

And I want to give you some background, on Hegel and Marx, and this concept of alienation, and how it applies to property. So we have a lot of things to get through. Let's get started with a few words about Hegel. Hegel was in a generation following Kant, and remember when we talked about Immanuel Kant last week, and then the first week of the course, we focussed on Kant's Two World Theory. You'll remember I said that Kant wanted to steer a middle course, between skepticism and science. between those who looked to subjective ideas for truth and those who looked out in the world for, for truth. Kant did this by saying, well there are some things we can know. We call them the, the things about the phenomenal world. And there are some things we have faith in, we just believe in, we don't have knowledge about. Let's call that the noumenal world. Remember, we talked about that with Kant. 

His students, rejected this dichotomy. Kant said, what I can tell you, really, is don't mix up the phenomenal and the noumenal. You can have knowledge of the phenomenal. You can really make predictions about whether the bridge will stand up. You can make predictions and rational decisions about how to make a clock in the, because those were phenomenal issues, but don't try to have knowledge about the immortality of the soul. Don't try to have knowledge about freedom. That was Kant's way to eat his cake and have it too, right. To have faith in the noumenal knowledge in the phenomenal. 

His students say, we've got to bring this together. Fichte, Schelling and Hegel among others try to figure out how they can bridge the phenomenal and the nouminal. Hegel writing during the french revolution and into the first decades of the 19th century. is the, is the, the thinking we want to focus on today. 

Hegel is the most important philosopher in up until his time to have looked at history with great seriousness. You have a quote there in front of you which is, a quote from one of Hegel's key texts about philosophy of history where he, in which he writes, the only thought which philosophy brings with it to the contemplation of history is the simple conception of reason, the simple conception of reason, that reason is the sovereign of the world. That the history of the world, therefore, presents us with a rational process. The history of the world presents us with a rational process. For Hegel this is really key, that the only place where you'll find truth, is in the world, in history. If we go back to Plato and the history of philosophy, they're often distinguishing between what happens in the world, which is real messy stuff, and the ideal.

The ideal realm, Kant called that ideal realm the noumenal. For Hegel said, it's only one world. It's the historical world. That's where truth is made. That's where truth happens. His quote goes on, reason is the substance of the universe. Reason is the infinite energy of the universe, everything we do in the world has to make sense, because making sense is grounded in history. Making sense is not something that happens out there in the noumenal realm or in the ideal realm. What makes sense is the historical record itself, if you know how to look at it, that is key for Hegel. If you have the philosophical or conceptual apparatus, for to know how to read history so history makes sense.

Modernity for Hegel is period in which we understand that the only place we should look for truth is right around us, not in some divine or ideal realm. The concept that many of you probably have heard of in regard to Hegel is the dialectic. Hegel's notion of the dialectic is his notion of, is, is his lens really for reading history. So what is the dialectic in here? I'm going to, I'm going to go back to a quote from Hegel. *In traversing the past, he wrote, we have only to do with what is present. The life of the ever-present spirit is a circle of progressive embodiments, he writes. Well, if you look at them in one way, they still exist beside each other. And if you look at them in another way, they've, some of them appear as past.* For Hegel, the key about history, is that the historical present contains the past within it, because the dialectical processes or how the past is retained in the present. Dialectical processes, is, are how the past is retained in the present. Now I, I know that sounds very abstract, but Hegel has something much more, concrete, in mind. It's that when you have one thing in history, it calls forth its opposite in a conflict. Fathers will conflict with sons and somehow the next generation will produces synthesis. We have the first point which we call, sometimes call that thesis, which calls forth its opposite. The pendulum swings, and they clash. And what you get is some, some result, some residue, but that has within it the first 2 terms, the father and the son, and then the next generation, the next generation. So these 3 moments for Hegel are what we find when we know how to read history. The thesis, it's opposite, the antithesis, and then what comes from them, a synthesis. That kind of opposition that gives rise to some, some result that opposition he calls negation or, in German, aufhebung. We'll talk about it the next time.

## 3 - 2 - From Enlightenment to Revolution, part 2 of 5 (12_55)

So, the dialectic involves these three moments. The thesis, its antithesis and then the synthesis that, that results from their conflict. *It's very important to realize that, for Hegel, conflict makes the world go round.* Conflict makes the world go round. Remember for Rousseau, what was really real was the state of nature, some point in the past where humans were authentically human and, and for Rousseau, that's the standard that he can use to imagine our degradation over time, that we build up inequality, we build up a taste for luxury. We build a vanity and envy, all of these things are corruption because it doesn't have to go that way, for Rousseau. and, and Rousseau's thinking actually gives rise to lots of other artists and, and philosophers who and romanticism, who, who, unlike Rousseau say we need to go back. You know, they imagine going backwards to this, this innocent state. A state prior to conflict. 

In Hegel, conflict goes all the way down. And we'll see that in Marx too. Conflict makes the world go round. The link between the ideal and the real, the link between the noumenal and the phenomenal. The, the, the link between what's false and what's ultimately true is history for Hegel. History is that link. History is reasonable. That is, that is the key for, that's the Hegelian tradition, that, and it's not just in the end of days that the Christian tradition would say the, in the end of days, right, it all will be true, right? *We'll all be, there's redemption and forgiveness in the end of days in the Christian tradition. But that happens in the, is, is almost a, it's miraculous salvation, right? or yeah, the salvation through love, or through grace, and mercy. In this tradition, the Hegelian tradition, building on the tradition, Christian tradition, to be sure, it is a process. Salvation, occurs because history is rational, it's, we're going to build a perfect society.* 

*And, and, and that's, that's a hard idea for many people to swallow. Because history is filled with so much suffering.* And that, that's what really, was, is quite amazing about Hegel. I mean, he, he tries to give an account of all historical struggle. So that it, it, it's justified. It makes sense. It, it, it is reason itself. He's deeply influenced by Christianity and Christian mysticism of the Reformation at the time and shortly afterwards, because for Hegel, Christianity prefigures his own insight into philosophy, that is in Christianity, God sends his only son to the world to redeem their sins. The truth, Logos, the truth, God comes to the world and is incarnated in the world. That's what Hegel takes as a lesson of Christianity, that truth is incarnated in the world, in the, in the flesh. And for Hegel says, that means the truth is in the flesh of history. So, he takes it from being the flesh of Jesus, to being the stuff of history. That's the only realm where truth is found.

And that actually gives politics a historical struggle, a much more important value then they would have otherwise had. You can't say, I'll go off and isolate yourself, and contemplate, and think you can find the truth, somewhere away from the noise of the street. The truth is in the street. The truth is on the battlefield. The truth is in politics. The truth will emerge in history. That is Hegel's strong belief, and it emerges dialectically, that is through this conflict: thesis, antithesis, synthesis, which he thinks is not just a way of looking at the world. It's not just a way of looking at the world, it's how the world works itself.

So, here's another quotation, from Hegel's philosophy of history. *The history of the world is none other than the progress of the consciousness of freedom.* You can hear the optimism of the revolutionary period. The history of the world is none other than progress in the consciousness of freedom, a progress whose development according to the necessity of its nature it's our business. Hegel writes to investigate. *So Hegel says, I am investigating progress, and progress is the advance in the consciousness of freedom and that means, for Hegel, that the truth is that all must be free, not just some people, not just the best people, not just the elite. But freedom has to spread through all of society, and that is the truth of history.*

Now, I want to, go back to dialectic, and make sure that we understand this, this notion of, of one thing calling forth as opposite, and then they are constantly giving rise to some kind of synthesis. I'll give you first a Hegelian category. medieval communalism, or feudalism, if you will, where you have everybody in, in this, in this a very generalized version. Everybody is in an organic relationship. They depend on each other. The whole gives meaning to its parts. That's that thesis, it gives rise to its opposite, Hegel says. Individualistic capitalism, where everybody's on their own. Everybody's on their own, everybody is, is fighting for their individual salvation, individual success, and there's no community. Hegel says those two things are in conflict, and they give rise to another kind of mitigated individualism where you have both freedom of the individual, and some communal interconnection.

Another example. On the one hand, you have an Infinite God. God is great, is omniscient, omnipotent, all the power. It gives rise to its opposite, sense that human beings have sometimes that I am nothing. I am nothing, I can't do anything. And then that conflict, infinite God, the human being as, as impoverished, as nothing, that, that, that conflict gives rise to a human who incarnates the divine. Gives rise to Christianity, gives rise to Jesus, as a, as a, as a merely human. I am a person, I am man, but who incarnates the divine. 

You have monarchical absolutism. Gives rise to revolutionary anarchism. And then somehow they combine in synthesis of ordered freedom. And that would be another example. You can have fun with this, or have the slide there where you can fill in the blanks. You have Charlie Chaplin, is your thesis. It gives rise to his antithesis. Let's say Groucho Marx, you know, extraordinary verbal, comedy. and then what's the synthesis of Charlie Chaplin and Groucho Marx? Maybe it's Woody Allen, or maybe you have some other idea. you can do this, you can start thinking dialectically by, by saying, okay, here's the one thing I wanted when I was 15, and when I was At 28 I thought I want just the opposite, and how does that come out later on in your life. How does it, how does that produce, it's not so much a compromise, but the residue of the conflict between those 2 positions, and you'll see some examples of that, on, this slide, which I call Rorty on thinking dialectically because Richard Rorty, great American philosopher, was my teacher when I was a graduate student at Princeton. He used to hand us a sheet like this with different ways of thinking about how opposites call for one another, and how one can imagine a synthesis of that conflict. 

So now, we finally get to Marx, because this idea of conflict is absolutely central to his thinking about history about politics, and about change. *Now Marx, if you know once sentence of, from Marx, it's the history of all hitherto society, existing society, is the history of class struggle.* The history of all hitherto existing societies is the history of class struggle. So you see, it's all about conflict, thesis giving rise to antithesis. *In the section of his work on alienation, that we, read today, he's trying to use this notion of a dialectic to understand how, through our labor, we actually become more estranged from ourselves. We actually lose ourselves through the work we do, which for Marx is a contradiction.* And we that is something we need, we, we, we will have to change. 

So, here's a quotation from Marx. _On the basis of political economy itself, he writes, we have shown that the worker sinks to the level of a commodity and becomes indeed the most wretched of commodities; that the wretchedness of the worker is in inverse proportion to the power and magnitude of his production._ There's your, there's the tension. The more you produce, the more impoverished you are as a worker. That is Marx's conflict. That is the conflict he is looking at in this text I've asked you to read for this week. You, how do, if you're working and you're trying to get out of poverty, what do you want to do? You work harder, but for Marx in this period of capitalism, the harder you work, the more impoverished you become. Because, you, you produce more and more, which will call for fewer, a smaller and smaller price, you'll get paid less and less, and you will feel more and more alienated. You will feel more and more that you have become as a worker, a commodity, somebody else's tool. And for Marx, that is a symptom of an industrial system that produces wealth for very, very few, and produces a sense of alienation, or what he calls self-estrangement, in this reading, for many.

Here's a quote from think it's paragraph four on alienation, from Marx. _The alienation of the worker in his product, means not only that his labor becomes an object, an external existence, but that it exists outside him, independently, as something alien to him, and that it becomes a power on its own, confronting him. It means that the life which he has conferred on the object confronts him as something hostile and alien._ What does he mean by this? For Marx, it's in some ways pretty simple. Before exploitation for Marx, when you were working in your own field, or at your own workbench, when you make something, you actually learn who you are. Through your work, and this is Hegel, a Hegelian idea, through your work you see more about yourself, you learn about yourself, from the work you do. So, if I was making, lets say, this pair of glasses, I've been working on it, you know, getting it right, making sure that the lenses are okay, and I, I put them on and they work, I think, my goodness, I've, that's, I'm the kind of person who can make these glasses. I've learned about myself, about my capacities, about my limitations, about my ability to work a certain amount of time. For something that, when I look at it, and say, this is mine. I have created this. *Marx says what happens in capitalism is when I make something, it's not mine. Somebody else takes it away immediately. I make something, and the more I make, the more it's somebody else's, and so by working, I lose myself.* We'll talk about that next time.

## 3 - 3 - From Enlightenment to Revolution, part 3 of 5 (9_28)

So, the worker, the more he works, the more he feels outside himself or that he has lost himself by producing something. *When, for Marx, what should be happening is when we produce things, we see ourselves in what we make as are, then we see a reflection of ourselves that increases our understanding. But, in the industrial regime, what we see, according to Marx is our own alienation, our own distance from ourselves.* 

Let me give you another quote. _The worker therefore only feels himself outside his work, and in his work feels outside himself_, that's from Marx When, the more you work, the more you feel you're not yourself. The worker feels at home when he is not working, and when he is working he does not feel at home. The external character of labor for the worker appears in the fact that it is not his own but someone else's, that it doesn't belong to him. And for Marx, this is a contradiction, because labor should be an extension of ourselves, that's really what's behind all this. It should be, Rousseau would say, by nature an extension of ourselves, but in fact, for Marx says, it becomes somebody else's. We lose ourselves in our work. And he says that the result of this is that we are in contradiction. We are in conflict.

Now, he's using this Hegelian model that I talked about earlier that says, conflict and contradiction are what push history along. And so Marx sees this contradiction in the worker and then he thinks that will actually create historical change, that will create historical change. So we're living in contradiction. He writes, as a result, _the worker only feels himself freely active in his animal functions, eating, drinking, procreating, or at most in his dwelling and in dressing-up, and in his human functions, he no longer feels himself to be anything but an animal. In his human functions, that is, the real work, he no longer feels himself to be anything but an animal._ 

And this is the famous sentence from this manuscript, what is animal becomes human and what is human becomes animal. What does Marx mean by that? He means that what is truly human about us, our ability to do creative work, to set off with an idea to create a pair of glasses, or to create a set of crops, and then to actually do it, that's what's human about us. We have foresight, we plan, we create, that that now becomes what makes us feel like an animal, like we're controlled by others. What is the most animal about us that we like to eat, that we procreate, that we drink too much, he thinks, that becomes when we feel free. *We feel free when we're doing the most animalistic things, Marx says. We want to go to sleep, that's when we feel free, because we work so hard. When we should feel most free, when we work. And Marx thinks since this is a contradition, this has to change.*

Now we have a little clip from a Charlie Chaplin film called Modern Times where you see great examples of this. I'll show you this, this assembly line seen, where you see the human being as, as, as, as Charlie turns the wrench, the human being is becoming turned into a machine, right? or in a scene the where, where Charlie is put into an eating machine. He is literally dehumanized right in front of our eyes, as part of the industrial process. And there are lots of other scenes we could show, but this one, it seems, vividly conveys what Marx had been talking about, many decades before the film was made.

So, as we get to the, the end of this text on alienation Marx introduces a concept that, that shows that the origin or or the foundation on which he is making this critical comments about us living in contradiction. This is the concept of species-life, and here's what he says about it, _the object of labor is, therefore, the objectification of man's species-life, for human beings duplicate themselves not only as in conciousness or intellectually, but they also, we also create ourselves actively in reality. We have to, we have to see ourselves in the world we create. When we tear our products away from ourselves, when we tear the things we make away from human beings what we're tearing apart, Marx says, is our, is our species-life._ And for Marx in his early work, -lifespecies functions a little bit like the state of nature for Rousseau. That is, it's the, the basis from which he makes criticism. In other words, for Marx, the way it should be, according to our species, according to our nature, is that our work shows us who we are, and instead, because of the industrial circumstances we live in, our work actually tears us away from ourselves. *So, for Marx, that means, things gotta change. It's gotta move in a direction through in which our labor will produce a sense of gratification and freedom for us, not just because of the stuff we can buy to sleep more or to procreate more or to get more intoxicated. No, that's for Marx, not our species-life.* Our species-life is that we are able to see ourselves in the creative work we do. We are able to see ourselves in our labor. 

So, notice that for Rousseau, this really real, the, the lens through which he sees modernity as the state of nature, the ideas of, of pity and self-preservation are things that he holds onto, so, that allows Rousseau to criticize what we've become, vain, envious, pursuing luxury, luxury. For Marx, that really real is this idea of species-life. It's the idea that we should actually see ourselves in our labor, but history, actually, is producing the opposite. History is producing the opposite, which is that we are increasingly alienated, even as we work more and more, we become further and further away from who we should be or who we might become. That's a contradiction for Marx. *We're living like animals even if we have a greater capacity to be human.* Boom, that should create a synthesis. That's the revolution for Marx.

And, and what he said was, there, I think it's the eleventh thesis of my Marxist catechism class was effective. *It was the eleventh thesis on Feuerbach was that philosophy has always interpreted the world, the point is to change it.* Philosophy has always interpreted the world, the point is to change it. So, you know, from Marx's chicken and egg problem, what it really was, is a, it has political problem. How can I, how can I change this world? That's, and, and, he is always, even when he gets old and, and cynical or, pessimistic about change, he is always thinking, linking his ideas to action. Unlike Hegel, right? Unlike Hegel, who thought philosophy should come afterwards and just make sense of things after the action is over. 

And in our next talk, we'll, we'll focus on the Communist Manifesto which is Marx and Engels attempt to say how historical contradictions give rise to political change, they always have, he says. And how, in our own time, Marx writes in 1847, they will give rise to radical political change, which will make our labor and our freedom come together, come together in a synthesis. They do that in 1847, and in 1848, revolutions do break out, but they don't break out the way Marx wanted them to, and they certainly did not turn out the way he predicted. We'll talk about that the next time.

## 3 - 4 - From Enlightenment to Revolution, part 4 of 5 (12_30)

Historical contradiction that Marx points out in this early text on, on alienation, is going to be overcome, and must be overcome. Because, for Marx remember, his Hegelian background, this dialectic, it can't, it can't, contradictions just can't, persist forever. Because truth emerges in history. History has to resolve contradictions. That's the Hegelian background, history doesn't allow contradictions to stay forever. It resolves them, and that's how you get to truth. For Marx, you see the very end of these economic and philosophical manuscripts, he says that when the worker realizes that the, the worker is oppressed and has to control his own labor, and Marx is thinking of men as workers, but later on, especially not exclusively. that when the worker liberates himself and his labor, that liberates everyone. Because that will show everyone that the work we do should be our own.

*Marx would probably say no, it's not romantic, it's rational, because our work should be our own. We produce things to see ourselves in the thing we produce.* It's not happening, it has to be resolved. But the working class for Marx is the vehicle for the resolution of historical contradictions. That's really important. The working class is the vehicle for Marx, for the resolution of historical contradictions. And when the working class resolves those contradictions, all the rest of us can wake up, and we, we can see those contradictions resolved, too, that's pretty extraordinary.

You see it at the very end, the last slide, from alienation to emancipation. And emancipation is the name of the game in the next text will look at from Marx, which is, the next text is the, the Communist Manifesto, written. With his friend and supporter Frederick Engels, just on the edge of revolutions to sweep across Europe in 1848. Just to remind you of some of the historical background, we spend a lot of time and ideas and, and art in this class and literature, we probably should spend a little more time on a historical context, I, I told you in a couple of lectures ago about Rousseau's influence on the french revolution, and the Reign of Terror in 1793, we didn't talk about, although many of you will, will be familiar with Napoleon's Rise in the late 1790's. And then his domination of Europe in the first 15 years of the 19th century. 

Napoleon's defeat in 1815, and the conservative reaction to the French revolution that sweeps across Europe in 1815, is a way of keeping the lid on political change. That's really the the goal of what is called the Congress of Vienna. and the conservative powers that would try to reestablish their after 1815, after Napoleon is captured and exiled. And it works for awhile. It works for awhile, but industrialization's going on, there are lots of economic changes, there are lots of other kinds of changes going on, and, and they can't really keep the lid on. They really can't. In France, as Charles X comes to power in the 1820's, but by 1830 there's another revolution in France and Charles X is deposed, he flees to England, and a much more moderate, some even say a bourgeois kings comes into power in France, Louis Philippe. 

German-speaking Europe is, is, is much more conservative, they have lots of petty principalities running small states. Prussia is still a very conservative place, but there is a burgeoning radical movement in Marxist part of that. Marx is taking his inspiration from the political changes in France. and he's taking his inspiration from German philosophy, and English economics. You know, Marx looks to France and says wow, revolution all these things are changing. It's possible to change the world. He looks at Germany and says, how does the world change? Well, Hegel tells me how the world changed. German philosophy change, tells me how the world changes. But Hegel didn't really know a lot about economics, so Marx turns to English thinkers for the for the labor theory of value, for understanding economic change. 

And he brings these, these concerns together in the Communist Manifesto. English economics, German philosopy, and French radicalism, French radicalism. and, and Marx is, I mean, with Marx's pen, that becomes this manifesto, announcing, announcing revolutions that are about to occur. A spectre is haunting Europe, he says, right, in the very beginning of the text, a spectre is haunting Europe, the spectre of communism. Now, one of the first things you have to notice in this text is who is doing the revolutionary work? And if we were in a classroom together, I would say, okay, everybody, who is doing the revolutionary work? and many people would raise their hands and they would say, oh it's the working class, it's, because Marxists. Marxists, and we know the working class is the emancipation, the emancipatory class. That's not true in the manifesto, right? If you have read it, I hope you have for this week. You know that what, for Marx, the class that does the most revolutionary work, is the Bourgeoisie , the middle class. He calls the Bourgeoisie, a most revolutionary class. Over the long run revolution would have to happen, because the economic conditions that allowed them For the generation of wealth would collapse, because of inherent contradictions to the system. 

But, let me just make sure we can get, get through some of the, this term towards the, the cure, if you will, or the revolution. *In all of these battles, it seems, it sees itself, the mid, the middle class has to appeal to the proletariat. To ask for help, it has to drag it into the political arena.* The bourgeoisie itself therefore supplies the proletariat with its own elements of political and general education. In other words, it furnishes the proletariat with weapons for fighting the bourgeoisie. *So what Marx is seeing here in the 1840's is that the middle class, in order to defeat the aristocracy, the middle class appeals to the workers to go out into the street, to create change, to create political action.*

And what happens afterwards is that, then the, you know, you get rid of, now you see, you get rid of the king, and then the, and the factory owners said, okay we're done. And the peasants or the, or the workers said, hey, we are not done. We want actually equality of wealth, and then hold, we just wanted to get rid of the king, and now we'll be okay. We just wanted to change a couple of things and now we'll be okay. And that works for awhile, but Marx thinks what will happen is that the workers who are activated politically, who are no longer passionate, instruments of oppression, they are actually become, they use, bribe the middle class to go into the street and protest that these people will say, I'm not going to do this anymore, cbeause I have learned from the bourgeoisie, how to, how to how to change the world. The bourgeoisie, he wrote, has stripped of its halo. Every occupation hitherto honoured, and looked up to with reverent awe. The bourgeoisie, the middle class, has converted the physician, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into page, paid wage labourers. *This is really important for Marx, because it's the middle class that exposes the truth of history that is, that it's all about class conflict.*

*The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class conflict.* Remember, that's the beginning of the Manifesto. In 1847, the really real for Marx is class struggle, because that's where the action was, and where change could, could occur. And, and in different epochs, when there is an explosion of radicalism, peoplee often try to find this what, where is the struggle going to make the biggest difference? Not long before I was a student, lots of folks thought the civil rights struggle would actually completely change America, and maybe the world. In other words, the, the rhetoric was often that the, the struggle for civil rights for African-Americans was not just going to just liberate African Americans. It would necessarily change all of society. That was the kind of Marxian, Marxish version of that. Sometimes, you hear that with, with in queer theory today, right? The more political versions of queer theory say, well if you queer everything, then the whole edifice of patriarchy and capitalism will fall down. That's important, because, that means you just, you don't modify things so to have like. You just have, if you have gender-neutral bathrooms, you're satisfied. No. The idea is that, that if you query things, everything will change, private property, family, and that. 

So, that's the looking, that's the guy looking for the hinge that will change everything, and for Marx, that hinge was class struggle. It's the bourgeoisie that shows that is true. *They reveal that money makes the world go 'round, if you will. They reveal that it's economic contradiction that forces people to do things they would otherwise find abhorent.* And it takes all of the sentimental disguise away from the the occupations of of, in the world around us. It takes away the the lawyer, the priest and the poet's sentimental disguises. He writes, the bourgeoisie has torn away from the family, even its sentimental veil, and it's reduced the family relation to a mere money relation. And in a famous passage, Marx writes that all fixed fast-frozen relations with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions are swept away. All new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. And here's the sentence that many people quote. _All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face with his sober senses his real relations of life, and his real relations with his kind._ This is so important for us, because, remember I used this phrase, really reall. What does it have, where does it think to grab onto something as a foundation?

For Marx, all that is solid melts into air, because the bourgeoisie shows you the real conditions of life, and that for Marx is economic exploitation. That behind marriage is economic growth exploitation, behind patriarchy is economic exploitation. Behind the economy, behind the government, behind everything. The real conditions of life are alienation and economic exploitation, that, once revealed, will make people want to change the conditions of their lives.

## 3 - 5 - From Enlightenment to Revolution, part 5 of 5 (13_24)

So, Marx publishes the Manifesto as 1847 turns to 1848. February revolutions break out, not because of the Manifesto, but imagine, how, how they must have felt having said that these revolutions were about to happen and then suddenly they break out. France and Paris in Feb, February. And then though central Europe in March and later into the spring. All over Europe, middle-class, working-class people, peasants even are getting involved and saying we need a change. We need to overthrow the old system. Now, at least that's how it looks to Marx. and his comrades, in the winter and the spring of 1848. But Marx, quick, sees that the revolutions don't turn out the way he expected them to unfold dialectically. in the Communist Manifesto in fact the the revolutions go in the wrong direction eventually.

And from 1848 to 1851 even into 1852, what Marx experiences is a period of great disillusion and it's this theme of disillusionment that we'll be talking about today. Remember, for Marx, this illusion was a theme of the manifesto. The voice was actually this illusion does in history that is they showed that all the things we believed in, all this fancy sentimental terms were actually illusion and what matters is economic. What Marx sees in 1848 to 1850, is that more illusions fall away, but they fall away very painfully, for people who are trying to create change. In France, the king in 1848, the king in 1848 is Louie Phillip, who is, was himself installed by a revolution in 1830. So he's a king on shaky ground. In fact they called him, lots of bad names actually, but they called him, the bourgeois king because he walked around in a suit. He carried an umbrella, which kings aren't supposed to do, someone's supposed to carry it for them. And he was trying to be a modern king, not like the person he deposed. Charles the 10th, who was very very reactionary. Louis Philippe was open to change, they even said he played the stock market. but nonetheless, in February 1848, he flees to the, to the safety of England, as I recall. and and the revolution is breaking out.

But, what happens in 1848, in that spring, is that. it becomes clear that the interest of all the revolutionaries are not identical. *The peasants, what do the peasants want? What they always want? They want land. What do the workers want? They want jobs. The want a decent wage. And the middle classes, they want power and money. And their desire for power and money is not compatible with the desire of the workers for a decent wage, and more jobs.* And may not be compatible with the demand of peasants for land. And so, the coalition of the winter of 1848 breaks apart between February and June.

And Marx, he writes about this in various places. One place that we quote on the slides, is the class struggles in France, where he writes. The present generation is like the Jews, whom Moses led through the wilderness. It has not only a new world to conquer, it must go under, in order to make room for the men who are fit for a new world. Notice that phrase, the next, this generation must go under In other words, Marx was saying, well. Revolution is not around the corner. And just like the Jews had to wander in the desert for 40 years. We must, we may have a much longer road than I anticipated in, with angles in the manifesto. and then, Marx sees, how these events unfold. And becomes very ironic about the destiny of political change in the middle of the 19th century. He says that the February revolution was the beautiful revolution, it was when everybody was, the brothers and sisters were all fighting for the same cause. But later on in June of 1848, you get the ugly revolution. The workers are in the streets of Paris, saying, we want jobs. We want food. We want wages that are, will allow us to live well. And, their former allies in the middle class bring out the army. bring out the army often, filled with the ranks with peasants from the countryside coming into Paris. And the workers get slaughtered in the streets. it's a very bloody time, it's called the June Days. It's a, it's a, it's a, a very important event in European history.

*When it's clear that the, the, the middle class and the working class, both of them think they're making progress. Actually, don't see progress in the same way. And Marx puts it this way.* the February revolution was the beautiful revolution, being very sarcastic here right. The revolution of universal sympathy because the contradictions, remember that word, because the contradictions which erupted in it against the monarchy were still undeveloped, and peacefully dormant. The June revolution, by contrast is the ugly revolution, the nasty revolution because the phrases have now given place to the real thing. It's so important for us here to see that because for Marx the ugly revolution is the true revolution, that is the revelation of truth. Beauty, hides the truth. It's the ugly, real, slutter of the workers that just, shows you the truth of the middle class interest.

*He says elsewhere there that, I think it goes like this; liberty, equality, and fraternity. You know, the, the great triumphant from the French Revolution, it really means infantry, cavalry and artillery.* That we will turn the guns on our former allies because we want to make money, we want to have power. So the past working class protest in the city, they come marching to the city scene to be victorious and then the businessman and the professors and the students They say, well this is not what we meant by. *We didn't want the working class actually getting property. We didn't want them taking over.* We need the gov, the army to come in. And the army comes in in June of 1848 with lots of French peasants from the good old days of Napoleon and they just move down, shoot down, murder the working class. 

Marx says, I don't think i have this in the slide, he says. What was revealed as, what were the words, the words of the February? The words were liberty, equality and fraternity. Right? That's from the, the 1789 revolution. Liberty, equality, fraternity. Marx says what they really meant were infantry, cavalry and artillery. That's what it really was about. The truth of bourgeois rule is final. Not equality, not liberty, not fraternity, that's beautiful stuff and it's false, a sentimental halo of revolution. What really matters is the 1st day of class, money, right? Liberty, equality, fraternity are really. Infantry cavalry and artillery. *And so the June revolution shows that peaceful social change is not going to happen. So Marks, he becomes disillusion with politics.* 

Another thinking is Alexis de Tocqueville. We've seen him before, de Tocqueville was now called a conservative thinker. It's probable that he was a thinker that is not easily categorized. *For Tocqueville in 1848, what he saw was a, an eruption of anarchy, where you just didn't know if the people who were your former colleagues or friends were going to just cut your throat. For him it was breakdown of sympathy and policy and a threat of the end of civilization.* For Marx, he thinks that the true violence of capitalism is revealed but it's not clear to him where politics is going to go. And although we don't go on with this in Marx, what Marx does after 1851, after the failures of this revolution, when Louis Napoleon Bonaparte becomes a dictator in France after this revolutionary period, Marx begins to look below, below the surface of history for real meaning.

After 1852, Marx's more and more inclined to look, not at class struggle, on the surface of history, but to dig to the economic laws beneath history. That's really where the true action is. I could put it this way: *In the manifesto, the reality for Marx is class struggle. After the failures of 1848, the reality for Marx become economic law.* And the project of capital, the multi volume work where he tries to uncover the laws of history, those are laws that act whether or not we realize them. We don't have to struggle for them, they happen, they just happen. And so Marx had a reading of history. In 1847 after 1852 he really wants to have a science of economics because history isn't going the right way. So economics will be where the action is, the really real. 

Gustave Flaubert had a different reaction in 1848, just give you a a taste of it because Flaubert looked at this and he just saw not the revelation of the ugly truth, but of the kind of banality and stupidity of politics. So, Flaubert's reaction as a lot of his friends: To withdraw from the public rum with the sense of irony and is and, and, and, and, and well listen to it. You'll, you hear it. Flaubert. What taste, what cuisine, what wines and what speeches, because at the time of these protests people would get together around bank which they make protest. And Flaubert just thought that this was so ridiculous and that the, the, that all they were going for were, was, was the food, the smorgasbord, not the, not the, the sense of justice or something. 

And, and he writes. _Nothing could make me more scornful of success, considering the price at which it is purchased. I sat unmoved, nauseated by the patriotic fervor They whipped up with immediately platitudes. Such as the abyss towards which we are running, the honor of our flag, the shadow cast by the standards, the fraternity of peoples._ For Flaubert, these are empty, banalities, cliches. *And if you have, if you were a thoughtful person. You would get away from politics if you had talent you would not waste it trying to convince people to follow you.* If you had capacity for greatness you would become an artist and you would get as far away from debates and politics as possible leave that to the to the hypocrites and the liars.  Because that's the only thing they can do. So, where Marx goes to do the science of economics. Flaubert and a generation we can all aesthetics, aestheticists. And really, what we'll come to call modernists. They say, we need to move away from history, and focus on art.
