philosophy/stoicism/articles.md, before:

## 9 Stoic Practices That Will Help You Thrive In The Madness Of Modernity
[Reference](https://medium.com/personal-growth/9-stoic-practices-that-will-help-you-thrive-in-the-madness-of-modernity-af9f1bdd56f4)

- ***Develop and Internal Locus of Control.*** Unhappiness comes from emotional responses we have chosen.
- ***Guard Your Time.*** Unlike money, this cannot be earned again. Calendars and schedules are meant to help us, we should not be a slave to them.
- ***Don't Outsource Your Happiness.***
- ***Stay Focused When Confronted With Distractions.*** When you're overwhelmed with choices, the default choice is to maintain the status quo.
- ***Toss Away Ego and Vanity.***
- ***Consolidate Your Thoughts in Writing.*** Journal = boosts creativity, increases gratitude, and serves as therapy all at once.
- ***Stand Your Ground.*** Cato doesn't forego his principles for tolerance or for profit. He eventually became Rome's arbiter of right and wrong.
- ***Imagine The Worst That Could Happen.*** Premeditation of evils. The goal is to imagine the worst events that could possibly happen to them. Loss of reputation? Financial ruin/poverty? This leads to asking yourself questions like: "What would things look like if everything went wrong tomorrow?", "How would I cope with that situation?", and "Should I change the way I live today?"
- ***Remember That Nothing Endures.***

## The Philosophy Of Stoicism: Five Lessons from Seneca, Musonius Rufus, Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus and Zeno of Citium.
[Reference](https://dailystoic.com/stoicism-five-lessons/)

- ***Live every day as if it were your last.*** “You live as if you were destined to live forever, no thought of your frailty ever enters your head, of how much time has already gone by you take no heed. You squander time as if you drew from a full and abundant supply, though all the while that day which you bestow on some person or thing is perhaps your last.”
- ***Food is the best test of self-control.*** What is the purpose of food, anyway? “That God who made man provided him food and drink for the sake of preserving his life and not for giving him pleasure, one can see very well from this: when food is performing its real function, it does not produce pleasure for man, that is in the process of digestion and assimilation.”
- ***Failure is natural, regret is foolish.*** "The impediment to action advances action. What stands in the way becomes the way."
  - Everything that happens, whether good or bad, is an opportunity to practice virtue.
  - Negative visualizations, and don't be surprised by failure. Expect it, embrace it, and seek after obstacles in your life which seem uncomfortable.
  - The moment you start to regret something in the past means you're acting against something you fundamentally cannot control. There is no practical reward from doing so, only frustration and anger.
  - The past is good for learning, not for regret.
- ***Focus on the small things.***
  - Well-being is attained by little and little, and nevertheless is no little thing itself.
  - It's not about big wins, but small wins that combine daily.
- ***Throw away vanity.***
  - "It is impossible for a man to learn what he thinks he already knows."
  - Be willing to learn, be willing to listen, be willing to leave your ego aside to learn, evolve, and develop through the wisdom of others and through embracing the joy of ignorance.

Commit message:

Added article on 99u re: stoicism.

philosophy/stoicism/articles.md, after:

## 9 Stoic Practices That Will Help You Thrive In The Madness Of Modernity
[Reference](https://medium.com/personal-growth/9-stoic-practices-that-will-help-you-thrive-in-the-madness-of-modernity-af9f1bdd56f4)

- ***Develop an Internal Locus of Control.*** Unhappiness comes from emotional responses we have chosen.
- ***Guard Your Time.*** Unlike money, this cannot be earned again. Calendars and schedules are meant to help us, we should not be a slave to them.
- ***Don't Outsource Your Happiness.***
- ***Stay Focused When Confronted With Distractions.*** When you're overwhelmed with choices, the default choice is to maintain the status quo.
- ***Toss Away Ego and Vanity.***
- ***Consolidate Your Thoughts in Writing.*** Journal = boosts creativity, increases gratitude, and serves as therapy all at once.
- ***Stand Your Ground.*** Cato doesn't forego his principles for tolerance or for profit. He eventually became Rome's arbiter of right and wrong.
- ***Imagine The Worst That Could Happen.*** Premeditation of evils. The goal is to imagine the worst events that could possibly happen to them. Loss of reputation? Financial ruin/poverty? This leads to asking yourself questions like: "What would things look like if everything went wrong tomorrow?", "How would I cope with that situation?", and "Should I change the way I live today?"
- ***Remember That Nothing Endures.***

## The Philosophy Of Stoicism: Five Lessons from Seneca, Musonius Rufus, Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus and Zeno of Citium.
[Reference](https://dailystoic.com/stoicism-five-lessons/)

- ***Live every day as if it were your last.*** “You live as if you were destined to live forever, no thought of your frailty ever enters your head, of how much time has already gone by you take no heed. You squander time as if you drew from a full and abundant supply, though all the while that day which you bestow on some person or thing is perhaps your last.”
- ***Food is the best test of self-control.*** What is the purpose of food, anyway? “That God who made man provided him food and drink for the sake of preserving his life and not for giving him pleasure, one can see very well from this: when food is performing its real function, it does not produce pleasure for man, that is in the process of digestion and assimilation.”
- ***Failure is natural, regret is foolish.*** "The impediment to action advances action. What stands in the way becomes the way."
  - Everything that happens, whether good or bad, is an opportunity to practice virtue.
  - Negative visualizations, and don't be surprised by failure. Expect it, embrace it, and seek after obstacles in your life which seem uncomfortable.
  - The moment you start to regret something in the past means you're acting against something you fundamentally cannot control. There is no practical reward from doing so, only frustration and anger.
  - The past is good for learning, not for regret.
- ***Focus on the small things.***
  - Well-being is attained by little and little, and nevertheless is no little thing itself.
  - It's not about big wins, but small wins that combine daily.
- ***Throw away vanity.***
  - "It is impossible for a man to learn what he thinks he already knows."
  - Be willing to learn, be willing to listen, be willing to leave your ego aside to learn, evolve, and develop through the wisdom of others and through embracing the joy of ignorance.

# The Stoic: 9 Principles to Help You Keep Calm in Chaos
[Reference](https://99u.adobe.com/articles/24401/a-makers-guidebook-9-stoic-principles-to-nurture-your-life-and-work)

- The Stoics focus on two things: "How can we lead a fulfilling, happy life?" "How can we become better human beings?"
- The goal of Stoicism is to attain inner peace by overcoming adversity, practicing self-control, being conscious of our impulses, realizing our ephemeral nature and the short time allotted.
- ***Acknowledge that all emotions come from within.*** "Today I escaped anxiety. Or no, I discarded it, because it was within me, in my own perceptions — not outside." — Marcus Aurelius, Meditations
  - It's not outside forces that make us feel something, but what we tell ourselves that create our feelings. A blank list is not stressful, it's your thoughts that are stressing you out.
  - When we flee from reality, we are doing nothing but harming ourselves and undermining our self-discipline. The next time you run into an obstacle, don't look at what's around you, instead, look within.
- ***Find someone you respect, and use them to stay honest.*** “Choose someone whose way of life as well as words, and whose very face as mirroring the character that lies behind it, have won your approval. Be always pointing him out to yourself either as your guardian or as your model. This is a need, in my view, for someone as a standard against which our characters can measure themselves. Without a ruler to do it against you won’t make the crooked straight.” — Seneca, Letters From a Stoic
  - Whatever you do, there are individuals that you can learn from. Study their story, their works, techniques, successes, failures, interviews.
  - This is not an exercise of comparison. How can you learn from your heroes?
- ***Recognize there is life after failure.*** “Does what’s happened keep you from acting with justice, generosity, self-control, sanity, prudence, honesty, humility, straightforwardness, and all other qualities that allow a person’s nature to fulfill itself? So remember this principle when something threatens to cause you pain: the thing itself was no misfortune at all; to endure it and prevail is great good fortune.” — Marcus Aurelius, Meditations
- ***Read purposefully, and apply your knowledge.*** “Don’t just say you have read books. Show that through them you have learned to think better, to be a more discriminating and reflective person. Books are the training weights of the mind. They are very helpful, but it would be a bad mistake to suppose that one has made progress simply by having internalized their contents.” — Epictetus, The Art of Living
  - Reading prepares your mind, even helps you avoid foolish mistakes, but at the end of it all there must be the result of some action: a failure, maybe a success, or a lesson.
- ***Challenge yourself to be brutally honest.*** “‘A consciousness of wrongdoing is the first step to salvation.’ A person who is not aware that he is doing anything wrong has no desire to be put right. You have to catch yourself doing it before you can reform.  So—to the best of your ability—demonstrate your own guilt, conduct inquiries of your own into all the evidence against yourself. Play the first part of prosecutor, then of judge and finally of pleader in mitigation. Be harsh with yourself at times.” — Seneca, Letters From a Stoic
  - "Why am I feeling this way right now?"
  - When you feel resistance, use that as a cue to go forward.
- ***Reflect on what you spend the most time on.*** “A key point to bear in mind: The value of attentiveness varies in proportion to its object. You’re better off not giving the small things more time than they deserve.” — Marcus Aurelius, Meditations
  - In my own observations, people who do excellent work, who master their craft, do so because of their ability to prioritize. They honor every hour of their day. If we put cameras behind our heroes, would our work ethic compare? Our focus? Our determination to get things done?
- ***Remind yourself: you weren't meant to procrastinate.*** “At dawn, when you have trouble getting out of bed, tell yourself: ‘I have to go to work—as a human being. What do I have to complain of, if I’m going to do what I was born for—the things I was brought into the world to do? Or is this what I was created for? To huddle under the blankets and stay warm?” — Marcus Aurelius, Meditations
- ***Put the phone away and be present.*** “Nothing, to my way of thinking, is a better proof of a well ordered mind than a man’s ability to stop just where he is and pass some time in his own company.” — Seneca, Letters From a Stoic
  - Throughout your day find a moment, however fleeting, to just sit and be still. Doesn’t matter where you are. Take a few deep breathes, put your phone on vibrate so there’s no chance of interruption, and just reflect on the series of events that took place throughout your day. When you’re working, be ruthlessly present. Let your mind focus on the task at hand, what you’re trying to accomplish, and do it with diligence, patience, attentiveness, and care. Sooner or later, you’ll realize how much of an asset this is to your creativity and overall quality of life.
- ***Remind yourself that time is our most precious resource.*** “Not to live as if you had endless years ahead of you. Death overshadows you. While you’re alive and able — be good.” — Marcus Aurelius, Meditations
  - It provides a sense of urgency, to realize that you've lived a certain number of hours and the hours ahead of you are not guaranteed as the ones you have lived.
  - This makes our self-respect, work ethic, generosity, self-awareness, attention, and growth evermore important. The last thing any of us wants to do is die with regret.
  - The way we lead our lives and do our work must embody the principles that we practice. Less comparing, criticizing, and consuming; more creating, learning, and living.
