# How to Build a Human

Well, you blink fourteen thousand times a day—so much that your eyes are shut for twenty-three minutes of every waking day.
In the second or so since you started this sentence, your body has made a million red blood cells.

- Your lungs, smoothed out, would cover a tennis court, and the airways within them would stretch nearly from coast to coast. The length of all your blood vessels would take you two and a half times around Earth. The most remarkable part of all is your DNA (or deoxyribonucleic acid). You have a meter of it packed into every cell, and so many cells that if you formed all the DNA in your body into a single strand, it would stretch ten billion miles, to beyond Pluto. Think of it: there is enough of you to leave the solar system. You are in the most literal sense cosmic.
- Women are much better than men at tactile sensitivity with fingers, but possibly just because they have smaller hands and thus a more dense network of sensors. An interesting thing about touch is that the brain doesn’t just tell you how something feels, but how it ought to feel. That’s why the caress of a lover feels wonderful, but the same touch by a stranger would feel creepy or horrible. It’s also why it is so hard to tickle yourself.

# The Outside: Skin and Hair

- Biologically, there is actually no such thing as race—nothing in terms of skin color, facial features, hair type, bone structure, or anything else that is a defining quality among peoples. And yet look how many people have been enslaved or hated or lynched or deprived of fundamental rights through history because of the color of their skin.
- What we can say is this: skin gets its color from a variety of pigments, of which the most important by far is a molecule formally called eumelanin but known universally as melanin. It is one of the oldest molecules in biology and is found throughout the living world. It doesn't just color skin. It gives birds the color of their feathers, fish the texture and luminescence of their scales, squid the purply blackness of their ink. It is even involved in making fruits go brown. In us, it also colors our hair.
- Skin color is a classic example of what is known as convergent evolution—that is, similar outcomes that have evolved in two or more locations. The people of, say, Sri Lanka and Polynesia have light brown skin not because of any direct genetic link but because they independently evolved brown skin to deal with the conditions of where they lived. It used to be thought that depigmentation probably took perhaps ten thousand to twenty thousand years, but now thanks to genomics we know it can happen much more quickly—in probably just two or three thousand years.
- It has been suggested that light skin may be a consequence of human migration and the rise of agriculture. The argument is that hunter-gatherers got a lot of their vitamin D from fish and game and that these inputs fell sharply when people started growing crops, especially as they moved into northern latitudes. It therefore became a great advantage to have lighter skin, to synthesize extra vitamin D.
- Lighter-colored eyes and hair evolved somewhere around the Baltic Sea about six thousand years ago. It’s not obvious why. Hair and eye color don’t affect vitamin D metabolism, or anything else physiological come to that, so there seems to be no practical benefit. The supposition is that these traits were selected for as tribal markers or because people found them more attractive. If you have blue or green eyes, it’s not because you have more of those colors in your irises than other people but because you simply have less of other colors. It is the paucity of other pigments that leaves the eyes looking blue or green. Skin color has been changing over a much longer period—at least sixty thousand years. But it hasn’t been a straightforward process.
- Hair is unique to mammals. Like the underlying skin, it serves a multitude of purposes: it provides warmth, cushioning, and camouflage, shields the body from ultraviolet light, and allows members of a group to signal to each other that they are angry or aroused. But some of these features clearly don’t work so well when you are nearly hairless.
- Hair on the head acts as a good insulator in cold weather and a good reflector of heat in hot weather. According to Nina Jablonski, tightly curled hair is the most efficient kind “because it increases the thickness of the space between the surface of the hair and the scalp, allowing air to blow through.” A separate but no less important reason for the retention of head hair is that it has been a tool of seduction since time immemorial.
- Pubic and underarm hair are more problematic. It is not easy to think of a way that armpit hair enriches human existence. One line of supposition is that secondary hair is used to trap or disperse (depending on theory) sexual scents, or pheromones. The one problem with this theory is that humans don’t seem to have pheromones. A study published in 2017 in Royal Society Open Science by researchers from Australia concluded that human pheromones probably don’t exist and certainly play no detectable role in attraction.
- The uniqueness of fingerprints was first established in the West by the nineteenth-century Czech anatomist Jan Purkinje, though in fact the Chinese had made the same discovery more than a thousand years earlier and for centuries Japanese potters had identified their wares by pressing a finger into the clay before baking. Charles Darwin’s cousin Francis Galton had suggested using fingerprints to catch criminals years before Bertillon came up with the notion, as did a Scottish missionary in Japan named Henry Faulds. Bertillon wasn’t even the first to use a fingerprint to catch a murderer—that happened in Argentina ten years earlier—but it is Bertillon who gets the credit.
- “The loss of most of our body hair and the gain of the ability to dissipate excess body heat through eccrine sweating helped to make possible the dramatic enlargement of our most temperature-sensitive organ, the brain.” That, she says, is how sweat helped to make you brainy.
- If he does nothing at all but sit and breathe, he will lose about one and a half quarts of water per day through a combination of sweat, respiration, and urination. But if he exerts himself, that rate of loss can shoot up to one and a half quarts per hour. That can quickly become dangerous. In grueling conditions—walking under a hot sun, say—you can easily sweat away ten and a half to twelve and a half quarts of water in a day. No wonder we need to keep hydrated when the weather is hot.
- Sweating is activated by the release of adrenaline, which is why when you are stressed, you break into a sweat. Unlike the rest of the body, the palms don’t sweat in response to physical exertion or heat, but only from stress. Emotional sweating is what is measured in lie detector tests.
- Sweat glands come in two varieties: eccrine and apocrine. Eccrine glands are much the more numerous and produce the watery sweat that dampens your shirt on a sweltering day. Apocrine glands are confined mostly to the groin and armpits (technically the axilla) and produce a thicker, stickier sweat.
- It is eccrine sweat in your feet—or more correctly the chemical breakdown by bacteria of the sweat in your feet—that accounts for their lush odor. Sweat on its own is actually odorless. It needs bacteria to create a smell. The two chemicals that account for the odor—isovaleric acid and methanediol—are also produced by bacterial actions on some cheeses, which is why feet and cheese can often smell so very alike.
- Chronic itching occurs in all kinds of conditions—brain tumors, strokes, autoimmune disorders, as a side effect of medications, and many more. One of the most maddening forms is phantom itching, which often accompanies an amputation and provides the miserable sufferer with a constant itch that simply cannot be satisfied. But perhaps the most extraordinary case of unappeasable suffering concerned a patient known as M., a Massachusetts woman in her late thirties who developed an irresistible itch on her upper forehead following a bout of shingles. The itch became so maddening that she rubbed the skin completely away over a patch of scalp about an inch and a half in diameter.

# Microbial You

- Willner found that the average person harbored 174 species of virus, 90 percent of which had never been seen before. Earth, we now know, is aswarm with viruses to a degree that until recently we barely suspected. According to the virologist Dorothy H. Crawford, ocean viruses alone if laid end to end would stretch for ten million light-years, a distance essentially beyond imagining.
- A rather more common manifestation of viral patience is seen in the varicella-zoster virus. This is the virus that gives you chicken pox when you are small, but then may sit inert in nerve cells for half a century or more before erupting in that horrid and painful indignity of old age known as shingles. It is usually described as a painful rash on the torso, but in fact shingles can pop up almost anywhere on the body surface.
- The common cold is not a single illness but rather a family of symptoms generated by a multiplicity of viruses, of which the most pernicious are the rhinoviruses. These alone come in a hundred varieties. There are, in short, lots of ways to catch a cold, which is why you never develop enough immunity to stop catching them all.
- Surprisingly, the least effective way to spread germs (according to yet another study) is kissing. It proved almost wholly ineffective among volunteers at the University of Wisconsin who had been successfully infected with cold virus. Sneezes and coughs weren’t much better. The only really reliable way to transfer cold germs is physically by touch.
- *A survey of subway trains in Boston found that metal poles are a fairly hostile environment for microbes. Where microbes thrive is in the fabrics on seats and on plastic handgrips. The most efficient method of transfer for germs, it seems, is a combination of folding money and nasal mucus. A study in Switzerland in 2008 found that flu virus can survive on paper money for two and a half weeks if it is accompanied by a microdot of snot. Without snot, most cold viruses could survive on folding money for no more than a few hours.*
- Then, two years after testing had begun, a lab assistant in Peoria named Mary Hunt brought in a cantaloupe from a local grocery store. It had a “pretty golden mold” growing on it, she recalled later. That mold proved to be two hundred times more potent than anything previously tested. The name and location of the store where Mary Hunt shopped are now forgotten, and the historic cantaloupe itself was not preserved: after the mold was scraped off, it was cut into pieces and eaten by the staff. But the mold lived on. Every bit of penicillin made since that day is descended from that single random cantaloupe.
- Most people in the Western world, by the time they reach adulthood, have received between five and twenty courses of antibiotics. The effects, it is feared, may be cumulative, with each generation passing on fewer microorganisms than the one before.
- Even more appallingly, in the United States 80 percent of antibiotics are fed to farm animals, mostly to fatten them. Fruit growers can also use antibiotics to combat bacterial infections in their crops. In consequence, most Americans consume secondhand antibiotics in their food (including even some foods labeled as organic) without knowing it.

# The Brain

- The great paradox of the brain is that everything you know about the world is provided to you by an organ that has itself never seen that world. The brain exists in silence and darkness, like a dungeoned prisoner. It has no pain receptors, literally no feelings. It has never felt warm sunshine or a soft breeze. To your brain, the world is just a stream of electrical pulses, like taps of Morse code. And out of this bare and neutral information it creates for you—quite literally creates—a vibrant, three-dimensional, sensually engaging universe. Your brain is you. Everything else is just plumbing and scaffolding.
- *The brain is often depicted as a hungry organ. It makes up just 2 percent of our body weight but uses 20 percent of our energy. In newborn infants, it’s no less than 65 percent. That’s partly why babies sleep all the time—their growing brains exhaust them—and have a lot of body fat, to use as an energy reserve when needed.* Your muscles actually use even more of your energy, about a quarter, but you have a lot of muscle; per unit of matter, the brain is by far the most expensive of our organs.
- *Unlike other parts of the body, the brain burns its four hundred calories at a steady rate no matter what you are doing. Hard thinking doesn't help you slim. In fact, it doesn't seem to confer any benefit at all.* The most efficient brains, he found, were those that could solve a task quickly and then go into a kind of standby mode.
- What is surely most curious and extraordinary about our brain is how largely unnecessary it is. To survive on Earth, you don’t need to be able to write music or engage in philosophy—you really only need to be able to out-think a quadruped—so why have we invested so much energy and risk in producing mental capacity that we don’t really need? That is just one of the many things about your brain that your brain won’t tell you.
- The parietal lobe manages sensory inputs like touch and temperature.
- The occipital lobe processes visual information, and the temporal lobe principally manages auditory information, though it also helps with processing visual information.
- It has been known for some years that six patches on the temporal lobe, known as face patches, become excited when we look at another face, though which parts of my face excite which of your patches is still largely uncertain, it seems.
- The frontal lobe is the seat of the higher functions of the brain—reasoning, forethought, problem solving, emotional control, and so on. It is the part responsible for personality, for who we are.
- The hypothalamus is curiously unimposing. Though only about the size of a peanut and weighing barely a tenth of an ounce, it controls much of the most important chemistry of the body. It regulates sexual function, controls hunger and thirst, monitors blood sugar and salts, decides when you need to sleep. It may even play a part in how slowly or rapidly we age. A large measure of your success or failure as a human being is dependent on this tiny thing in the middle of your head.
- *To help us deal better with this fractional lag, the brain does a truly extraordinary thing: it continuously forecasts what the world will be like a fifth of a second from now, and that is what it gives us as the present. That means that we never see the world as it is at this very instant, but rather as it will be a fraction of a moment in the future. We spend our whole lives, in other words, living in a world that doesn’t quite exist yet.*
- Declarative memory is the kind you can put into words—the names of state capitals, your date of birth, how to spell “ophthalmologist,” and everything else you know as fact.
- Procedural memory describes the things you know and understand but couldn’t so easily put into words—how to swim, drive a car, peel an orange, identify colors.
- What is certainly true is that we retain a great deal more than we can easily summon to mind. You may not recollect much of a neighborhood you lived in when you were small, but if you went back and walked around it, you would almost certainly remember very particular details you hadn’t thought about for years.
- The brain takes a long time to form completely. A teenager’s brain is only about 80 percent finished (which may not come as a great surprise to the parents of teenagers). Although most of the growth of the brain occurs in the first two years and is 95 percent completed by the age of ten, the synapses aren't fully wired until a young person is in his or her mid- to late twenties. That means that the teenage years effectively extend well into adulthood.
- *The nucleus accumbens, a region of the forebrain associated with pleasure, grows to its largest size in one’s teenage years.* At the same time, the body produces more dopamine, the neurotransmitter that conveys pleasure, than it ever will again. That is why the sensations you feel as a teenager are more intense than at any other time of life. But it also means that seeking pleasure is an occupational hazard for teenagers. The leading cause of deaths among teenagers is accidents—and the leading cause of accidents is simply being with other teenagers. When more than one teenager is in a car, for instance, the risk of an accident multiplies by 400 percent.
- There seems to be an almost limitless number of curious or bizarre syndromes and conditions associated with neural disorders.
  - Anton-Babinski syndrome, for instance, is a condition in which people are blind but refuse to believe it.
  - In Riddoch syndrome, victims cannot see objects unless they are in motion.
  - Capgras syndrome is a condition in which sufferers become convinced that those close to them are impostors.
  - In Klüver-Bucy syndrome, the victims develop an urge to eat and fornicate indiscriminately (to the understandable dismay of loved ones).
  - Perhaps the most bizarre of all is Cotard delusion, in which the sufferer believes he is dead and cannot be convinced otherwise.
- Perhaps nothing is more unexpected about our brains than that they are much smaller today than they were ten thousand or twelve thousand years ago, and by quite a lot. The average brain has shrunk from 1,500 cubic centimeters then to 1,350 cubic centimeters now.
- Over roughly the same period, our skulls have also become thinner. No one can really explain that either. It may be simply that a less robust and active lifestyle means that we don’t need to invest in skull bone in the way we used to. But then again it may simply be that we aren't what we once were.

# The Head

- A decapitated head will still have some oxygenated blood in it, so loss of consciousness may not be instantaneous. Estimates of how long the brain can keep working range from two seconds to seven, and that is assuming a clean removal, which was by no means always the case.
- What Darwin realized was something that all babies know instinctively—that the human face is highly expressive and instantly captivating. No two authorities seem to agree on quite how many expressions we can make—estimates range from forty-one hundred to ten thousand—but it is clearly a large number. More than forty muscles, a significant portion of the body’s total, are involved in facial expression. Babies fresh from the womb are said to prefer a face, or even the general pattern of a face, to any other shape. Whole regions of the brain are devoted solely to recognizing faces. We are exquisitely sensitive to the subtlest alterations of mood or expression, even if we are not always conscious of them.
- All the many species of hominids that preceded us had prominent browridges, but we Homo sapiens gave them up in favor of our small, active eyebrows. It’s not easy to say why. One theory is that eyebrows are there to keep sweat out of the eyes, but what the eyebrows do really well is convey feelings. Think how many messages you can send with a single arched eyebrow, from “I find that hard to believe” to “Watch your step” to “Care to have sex?”
- Eyelashes are similarly uncertain. There is some evidence to suggest that eyelashes subtly change airflow around the eye, helping to waft away motes of dust and other tiny particulates from landing there, but the main benefit is probably that they add interest and allure to faces. People with long eyelashes are generally rated more attractive than those without.
- It was an odd choice because the eye is really rather the reverse—literally so, for it is built back to front. The rods and cones that detect light are at the rear, but the blood vessels that keep it oxygenated are in front of them. There are vessels and nerve fibers and other incidental detritus all over, and your eye has to see through all this. Normally, your brain edits out any interference, but it doesn't always succeed. You might have had the experience of looking at a clear blue sky on a sunny day and seeing little white sparks popping in and out of existence, like the briefest of shooting stars. What you are seeing, amazingly enough, is your own white blood cells, moving through a capillary in front of the retina. Because white blood cells are big (compared with red blood cells), they sometimes get stuck briefly in the narrow capillaries, and that is what you are seeing.
- “People hardly ever lose their sense of taste,” Beauchamp told me. “Taste is supported by three different nerves, so there is quite a lot of backup. Our sense of smell is much more vulnerable.” The main cause of smell loss is infectious diseases like flu and sinusitis, but it can also result from a knock to the head or neural degeneration. One of the early symptoms of Alzheimer’s is smell loss. Ninety percent of people who lose smell through head injury never get the sense back; a smaller proportion, about 70 percent, who lose smell through infections suffer permanent loss.
- “People who lose their sense of smell are usually astounded at how much pleasure it takes out of their lives,” says Beauchamp. “We depend on smell for interpreting the world but also, no less crucially, for getting pleasure from it.”

# The Mouth and Throat

- We choke to death more easily than any other mammal. Indeed, it can reasonably be said that we are built to choke, which is clearly an odd attribute to go through life with—with or without a coin in your trachea.
- The complexity of human swallowing is largely because our larynx is low in the throat compared with other primates. To accommodate our upright posture when we became bipedal, our necks became longer and straighter and moved to a more central position beneath the skull rather than toward the rear as in other apes.
Just recently it was discovered that saliva also contains a powerful painkiller called opiorphin. It is six times more potent than morphine, though we have it only in very small doses, which is why you are not perennially high or indeed notably pain-free when you bite your cheek or burn your tongue. Because it is so dilute, no one is sure why it is there at all. It is so unassertive that its existence wasn't even noticed until 2006.
- We produce very little saliva while we sleep, which is why microbes can proliferate then and give you a foul mouth to wake to. It is also why brushing your teeth at bedtime is a good idea because it reduces the number of bacteria you go to sleep with. If you've ever wondered why no one wants to kiss you first thing in the morning, it is possibly because your exhalations may contain up to 150 different chemical compounds, not all of them as fresh and minty as we might hope.
- Incidentally, we have pain detectors not only in the mouth but also in the eyes, anus, and vagina, which is why spicy foods can cause discomfort there.
- The word “umami” isn’t recorded anywhere in English until 1963, when it appeared in an academic paper. Its first appearance in a more mainstream publication was in 1979 in New Scientist. Ikeda’s article wasn’t translated into English until 2002, after umami taste receptors had been confirmed by Western researchers.
- It is perhaps worth noting that in 2011 a researcher at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm noticed that people who had had their tonsils removed while young had a 44 percent greater chance of having a heart attack in later life. Of course, the two events may only be coincidentally related, but in the absence of conclusive evidence it suggests that it might be prudent to leave the tonsils alone. The same study also found that people who kept their appendixes had a 33 percent reduced chance of a heart attack in middle age.

# The Heart and Blood

- The heart has no time for distractions. It is the most single-minded thing within you. It has just one job to do, and it does it supremely well: it beats. Slightly more than once every second, about 100,000 times a day, as many as 3.5 billion times in a lifetime, it rhythmically pulses to push blood through your body—and these aren't gentle thrusts. They are jolts powerful enough to send blood spurting up to three meters if the aorta is severed.
- There are lots of ways the heart can falter. It can skip a beat, or more usually have an extra beat, because an electrical impulse misfires. Some people can have as many as ten thousand of these palpitations a day without being aware of it. For others, an arrhythmic heart is an endless discomforting ordeal. When the heart’s rhythm is too slow, the condition is called bradycardia; when too fast, it is tachycardia.
- Cardiac arrest is when the heart stops pumping altogether, usually because of a failure in electrical signaling. When the heart stops pumping, the brain is deprived of oxygen and unconsciousness swiftly follows, with death not far behind unless treatment is quickly applied. A heart attack will often lead to cardiac arrest, but you can suffer cardiac arrest without having a heart attack. The distinction between the two is medically important because they require different treatments, though the distinction may be a touch academic to the sufferer.
- All forms of heart failure can be cruelly sneaky. For about a quarter of victims, the first (and, more unfortunately, last) time they know they have a heart problem is when they suffer a fatal heart attack. No less appallingly, more than half of all first heart attacks (fatal or otherwise) occur in people who are fit and healthy and have no known obvious risks. They don’t smoke or drink to excess, are not seriously overweight, and do not have chronically high blood pressure or even bad cholesterol readings, but they get a heart attack anyway. Living a virtuous life doesn’t guarantee that you will escape heart problems; it just improves your chances.
- A woman is more likely to experience abdominal pain and nausea than a man, which makes it more likely that the problem will be misdiagnosed. Partly for this reason, women who have heart attacks before their mid-fifties are twice as likely to die as a man.
- Some people who are about to experience catastrophic heart failure suffer a sudden, terrifying premonition of impending death. The condition is commonly enough observed that it has a medical name: angor animi, or “anguish of the soul.” For a lucky few victims (insofar as good fortune can be attached to a fatal event), death comes so swiftly that they appear to feel no pain. My own father went to bed one night in 1986 and never woke up. As far as could be told, he died without pain or distress or indeed awareness.
- To make themselves maximally efficient, they have jettisoned virtually all the components of a conventional cell—DNA, RNA, mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, enzymes of every description. A full red blood cell is almost entirely hemoglobin. It is essentially a shipping container. A notable paradox of red blood cells is that although they carry oxygen to all the other cells of the body, they don’t use oxygen themselves. They use glucose for their own energy needs.
- Hemoglobin has one strange and dangerous quirk: it vastly prefers carbon monoxide to oxygen. If carbon monoxide is present, hemoglobin will pack it in, like passengers on a rush-hour train, and leave the oxygen on the platform. That’s why it kills people.
- As soon as a bleed starts, millions of platelets begin to cluster around the wound and are joined by similarly vast numbers of proteins, which deposit a material called fibrin. This agglomerates with the platelets to make a plug. To try to avoid errors, no fewer than twelve fail-safe mechanisms are built into the process. Clotting doesn't work in the principal arteries, because the flow of blood is too fierce; any clot would be swept away, which is why major bleeds must be stopped with the pressure of a tourniquet. In severe bleeding, the body does all it can to keep blood flowing to the vital organs and diverts it away from secondary outposts like muscles and surface tissues. That’s why patients who are bleeding heavily turn a cadaverous white and are cold to the touch.
